Title: 2603.00875v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.00875v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 02:07:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
1

# Battery Lifetime Prediction using Data -driven Modeling 

# Approaches 

# Vikram C Patil , North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA .

# Abstract 

Batteries are ubiquitous today, with applications ranging from smartphones, watches, and 

laptops to electric cars, drones, and electric aircraft. Lithium -ion batteries are widely used in 

these applications due to their high energy density, rechargeability, and low lifecycle cost. 

Understanding the lifetime of lithium -ion batteries is essential for their effective utilization across 

many domains. In this study, data -driven modeling approaches are explored to predict the 

lifetime of lithium -ion batteries using various measurable battery parameters. A battery dataset 

from NASA’s electric aircraft experiments was used, which included 17 predictor vari ables and 

remaining flight time as the response variable representing battery lifetime. The dataset 

contained more than 4,000,000 rows. However, the original dataset provided limited directly 

useful information about battery utilization over time; therefore, feature engineering was 

performed to generate more informative variables. Additionally, dimensionality reduction using 

principal comp onent analysis (PCA) was applied to reduce computational cost and model 

complexity by selecting a smaller number of principal components as predictors for model 

development. Random forest and neural network models were explored for battery lifetime 

prediction using the engineered features. Multiple neural network configurations were 

evaluated, including single - and double -hidden -layer architectures with varying numbers of 

node s. Mean squared error (MSE) on the test dataset was used as the performance metric for 

model comparison. The results indicate that data -driven modeling approaches are effective for 

battery lifetime prediction, with neural network models outperforming other models based on 

the MSE metric. Furthermore, neural networks demonstrate robustness in handling high -

dim ensional battery data. Overall, the complex behavior of batteries can be effectively modeled 

using data -driven machine learning techniques to predict battery lifetime with reasonable 

accuracy. Future research in this area could further enhance prediction a ccuracy, computational 

efficiency, and model reliability. 2

# 1. Introduction 

Batteries especially rechargeable Li -ion batteries are ubiquitous ly used for a range of 

applications like smartphones, laptops, drones , e -scooters, electric cars, buses, aircrafts , etc. 

(Pistoia, G . 2013 ). They also play an important role in curb ing global warming and climate change 

by reducing the use of fossil fuels and by increasing the use of more renewable energy resources 

(Climate Central , 2019) . The characteristics like h igh energy density and long lifetime of Li -ion 

batteries compared to other battery types make them preferable for many applications (Yoshio, 

M., Brodd, R.J. and Kozawa, A. 2009 ). For many applications of Li -ion batteries , lifetime prediction 

of the battery is crucial for reliable use and evaluat ing financial viability. For example, car 

manufacturers or owners of electric car s would like to know the longevity of the battery used in 

the car. If battery life is significantly lower than the car’s li fe , then battery replacement needs to 

be planned. Conversely, a battery lasting longer than a smartphone may be unnecessary and lead 

to the overburden cost to the owne r. Therefore, lifetime prediction Li -ion batter ies for a variety 

of battery applications could be highly valuable for their appropriate use in a variety of 

applications. Moreover, understanding uncertainty in the lifetime prediction could be highl y

useful for determining the warranty time for these batteries. With quantified uncertainties or 

probabilities in the lifetime prediction, manufacturers of Li -ion batteries can mitigate the 

financial risks of warranty claims due to battery failures by providing a warranty with less 

probability of failure. 

There are various approaches that can be used for modelling the lifetime of batteries in 

general. Figure 1. (Hosen et al. 2021, pp. 102060) illustrates three major types of approaches that 

can be used with their features. The first one is the electrochemical model also called physics -

based modeling because it is based on physical laws governing various mechanisms of battery 

aging over its use. This physic s-based approach can result in a highly accurate model with the use 

of limited experimental data; howeve r, it is complex, computationally expensive , and less 

applicab le for real -world conditions . The second approach is a semi -empirical model ling 

approach that uses less complex mathematical equations in simplified form s governing equations 

describing the physi cs in the battery . The semi -empirical models generally need good quality and 3

a reasonable quantity of experimental data with diverse application conditions . The data is used 

to tune the parameters in the model. Semi -empirical models are computationally easy compared 

to electrochemical models and they can show significantly lower model accuracy compared to 

electrochemical models. The third major modelling approach that ha s actively been explored 

with the progress of the data science field is data -driven modelling . In the data -driven modelling 

approach, advanced data science techniques are used to model ba ttery aging and lifetime . Data -

driven modelling require s limited knowledge of physical mechanisms in batteries but can build 

highly complex models that can be used for a range of applications with high accuracy. Data -

driven models are proven to be easy to develop but generally require a large amount of data 

covering a range of operating conditions. 

Figure 1. Battery lifetime modelling approaches at glance. (Source: Hosen et al . 2021 , pp. 102060) 4

With technological advancements and more awareness about renewable energy, electric 

vehicles are becoming increasingly common. However, the dream of an electric commercial 

aircraft is still far from reality. There are many challenges that are presented when a c ommercial 

aircraft is powered using an electric propulsion system, for example, the absence of a practical 

cooling system, the weight of the engines , etc. Yet the major limiting factor is the battery, 

especially estimating the remaining battery operating t ime and subsequently the remaining flying 

time of the aircraft. It is imperative to predict the remaining flying time to alert the flyer to initiate 

the landing procedure before the battery’s State of Charge (SOC) is two minutes away from falling 

below the safe 30% threshold. There is ongoing research at the National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration (NASA) to address this issue. In this project, battery data on electric aircraft is 

considered to predict the lifetime of the bat tery using data -driven mach ine learning models. 

## 1.1. Aim 

Develop and identify suitable data -driven machine learning models for predicting the lifetime 

of Lithium -ion batter ies using on-field operation data on batteries. 

## 1.2. Objectives 

i)  Analyze and identify suitable features from the battery lifetime data useful for predicting 

the lifetime with reasonable accuracy. 

ii)  Develop and test various machine learning models to predict battery lifetime. 

iii) Compare and evaluate the effectiveness of various models on different model assessment 

metrics. 

iv) Assess the effectiveness and limitations of various machine learning models in predicting 

the lifetime of the battery. 

v) Identify and evaluate possible uncertainty estimation techniques suitable for the data -

driven battery lifetime modelling approach. 

## 1.3. Research Questions 

i)  Is data -driven modelling an effective approach for predicting the lifetime of a battery with 

reasonable accuracy? 5

ii) Are there any machine learning models effective in predicting the lifetime of a battery 

outside the conditions covered by the training dataset? 

iii) Can data -driven models provide a measure of uncertainty in battery lifetime prediction? 

# 2. Literature Review 

The d ata -driven modelling approach was seldom used for battery modelling in past due to 

the l imited availability of data , the higher cost of generating data , and the difficulty in interpret ing 

the data -driven models . Many e arlier studies on battery lifetime modelling were based on a semi -

empirical modelling approach using experimental data generated on batter ies covering different 

operating conditions. An overview of different approaches to battery lifetime prediction is 

presented by Zhang, Liang, and Zhang (2017, p. 012134) .

Machine learning techniques have been explored recently for the application of lifetime 

prediction of Li -ion batteries . Severson et al (2 2019, pp. 383 -391) used a data -driven modelling 

approach on data before significant capacity degradation to predict battery cycle life . In Severson 

et al. work, discharge voltage curves from early cycles were used to predict and classify battery 

cells by cycle life. Features created by linear and non -linear transformations of raw data were 

used to train Elastic net . The model is shown to be e ffective in predicting the cycle life of the 

battery with a test error of 9.1% on 124 commercial lithium -ion batter y data. 

Another study by Zhu , Zhao and Sha (2019, p.e98) used data recorded on 138 

LFP/graphite battery cells . They constructed a classification model to predict battery cells into 

two distinct classes ‘low lifetime ’ and ‘high lifetime’. Various machine learning methods like 

decision t ree s, K-nearest neighbors , Neural Net, AdaBoost, GPR, Random Forest, Support Vector 

Machines, and Naïve Bayes were fitted and compared for better classification accuracy. Figure 2

compares t he p rediction accuracy of various machine learning methods on the same dataset 

observed in th eir study. Many techniques have shown a good accuracy and the decision tree 

model show ed the best test accuracy metric. Although the method has shown effective ness in 

classifying the battery cells into low or high -life classes with reasonable accuracy, the method 

lacks in providing prediction of battery life in years. 6

Figure 2. Prediction accuracy comparison of various machine learning algorithms on the same 

test dataset . The legend “2-1” and “100 -1” indicate two sets of feature combination s. (Source: 

Zhu, Zhao and Sha 2019, p.e98) .

In a recent study , Hosen et al . (2021 , pp. 102060) compared various battery lifetime 

modelling approaches . In their study , two machine learning -based models based on Gaussian 

Process Regression (GPR) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) were compared with a semi -

empirical model. GPR model with exponential kernel was created whereas a nonlinear 

autoregressive dynamics network with external inputs (NARX) ANN model was used . The model 

assessment indicated that the NARX ANN model was the best model for Root mean squared error 

(RMSE), Mean absolute error (MAE), and computational time metrics. Importantly, both the 

data -driven machine learning modelling approaches ha d shown higher accuracy than semi -

empirical. 7

In a nother recent study , a comprehensive Machine Learning (ML) based framework 

consisting of feature extraction, feature selection , and ML -based prediction of battery life from 

early cycles data was proposed by Fie et al (2021, p. 120205) . Six ML -based models including 

elastic net, Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) , Support Vector Machine (SVM), Gradient 

Boost ing (GB) r egression tree , random forest, and ne ural network wer e considered on a set of 42 

features extracted from only the first 100 cycles . It was observed that elastic net, GPR , and SVM 

models showed better test results than the GB -regression tree, random forest, and neural 

network . Moreover, wrapper -based feature selection has shown effectiveness in improving the 

prediction performance for all the models. Although many previous studies have showcased the 

effectiveness of data -driven models for battery lifetime prediction , many of these methods have 

not prove n their credibility for predicting the operating conditions outside the data used for 

model development . Lifetime prediction from limited data outside ope rating conditions of 

battery training data is needed for the fast -paced battery industry. 

Moreover, the topic of data -driven lifetime modelling of Li -ion batteries is of interest to many 

researchers working on the advancement of battery technology. National Renewable Energy 

Laboratory of the USA is working on a physics -based machine learning approach for improving 

lifetime prediction accuracy ( U.S. Department of Energy , 2 02 2). Additionally, Argonne national 

laborator y (ANL) of the USA is developing a comprehensive AI -driven approach to predict battery 

life and degradation trends with limited usage of data ( Argonne National Laboratory 202 2). For 

the growing battery usage with many applications demanding a longer batt ery lifetime, 

prediction of battery lifetime accurately is of significant interest to the battery industry and 

academics. 

# 3. Dataset 

There are limited battery datasets available publicly. An article ( BatteryBits , 2020) reviews 

and compares fourteen publicly available battery datasets from various sources. The cycle life 

prediction dataset from Stanford university is a good fit for testing data -driven approaches. 

Figure 3 ( BatteryBits , 2020) shows capacity aging data of 135 Li -ion battery cells tested under 

different operating conditions from this dataset. The lifetime of a Li -ion battery is represented 8

either in time or the number of cycles to reach the capacity of the battery to a certain percentage 

(generally 70% or 80%) of the initial capacity. The capacity of the battery reduces as it is used or 

rested. The black dotted line in the plot is the lifeti me condition to reach 80% of initial capacity 

and solid circles denote the end -of -life time for the individual plot. It can be observed that in this 

dataset lifetime ranges from a few hundred cycles to a few thousand cycles. These differences 

can be due to the different operating conditions the battery experiences when in use. This 

dataset only provides cycle life information for the highest number of cells (135 total) of any 

publicly available dataset with rich information about features. It is important to get on -field data 

from the battery in the application to get a rich dataset with real -world data with rich 

information. 

Figure 3. Capacity aging of 135 Li -ion battery cells tested under different operating conditions .

(Source:  BatteryBits , 2020) 9

The data from various sources was attempted to access to get it in a useful format. However, 

many of battery data is available in encoded formats which makes it difficult to use. Moreover, 

only a few sources shared a detailed description of data variables. It was very trouble some to get 

data with details including battery lifetime . One unique dataset that was available easily but 

required a lot of data processing to get in the right format was from NASA ’s prognostic center of 

excellence lab oratory .

Electric aircraft generally record a significant amount of detailed battery data . Battery data 

recorded from electric aircraft not only have rich information but also highly real -world data. The 

application demands higher safety standards and therefore the data quality is generally of a high 

standard. Therefore, data from electric aircraft was considered for this project. Specifically, t he 

data from ground test experiments conducted by NASA on Electric Edge 540 aircraft (NASA 

Prognostics Data Repository ). These are aerobatic aerial vehicles, and their sub -scale version was 

used for these experiments. There is a large amount of data available for these experiments. For 

our analysis, we have used data from 9 experiments, which is approximately 4 ,000,000 rows. 

## 3.1. Variables 

The dataset consists of 18 variables describing three major types of measurements included :

i)  Remaining flying time estimate for the aircraft – This variable is battery lifetime and 

therefore it is the response variable for our analysis. It is measured in seconds. 

ii)  Aircraft states – Three variables namely ‘Revolutions per minute (RPM) ’, ‘Forward Motor 

Controlled Sensor ’ and ‘After Motor Controlled Sensor measure ’ the aircraft state at a 

given point of time. 

iii)  Battery SOC estimates – There are 14 variables describing the state of charge (SOC) of 

different batteries used in the aircraft. Batter y’s state of charge has been described by 

measures of its voltage, current, and temperature at a given point in time. 

These variables are generally measured and stored as a part of Battery Management systems 

recordings. These variables include both directly measured and indirectly ca lculated variables. 

The response variable ‘Remaining flying time ’ and aircraft states are directly measured . Battery 

SOC estimates are calculated variable s from direct measurements of voltage, current and 

temperature of the bat tery. The direct variables generally do not have significant measurement 10 

errors. The indirect variables many times have both measurement errors due to direct 

measurement variables used to calculate the indirect variable and error s due to estimation .

The list of names of all the 18 variables is as below. 

Response Variable :

• Remaining flying time estimate i.e. battery lifetime (in seconds) 

Variables describing Aircraft state :

• Revolutions per Minute (RPM) 

• Forward Motor Controller Sensor (FMC) 

• AMC – After Motor Controller Sensor 

Variables describing Battery SOC :

• LLF20V Lower Left Front – Battery Voltage 

• ULA20V Upper Left After – Battery Voltage 

• LRF40V – Lower Right Front – Series Combined Voltage 

• URA40V – Upper Right After – Series Combined Voltage 

• LRF20V – Lower Right Front – Battery Voltage 

• URA20V – Upper Right After – Battery Voltage 

• LLF20C – Lower Left Forward – Battery Current 

• ULA20C – Upper Left After – Battery Current 

• LRF40C – Lower Right After – Series Combined Current 

• URA40C – Upper Right After – Series Combined Current 

• LLF20T – Lower Left Front – Temperature 

• ULA20T – Upper Left After – Temperature 

• LRF40T – Lower Right Front – Series Combined Temperature 

• URA40T – Upper Right After – Series Combined Temperature 11 

# 4. Methodology 

The available dataset was split into training, testing , and validation datasets to train, test , and 

validate models . Various prediction machine learning models w ere trained on the training 

dataset to predict the cycle life of the battery. First simplistic models like regression, decision 

tree , and single layer small Neural Network , are tested to understand the effective ness and 

accuracy of the simplistic model in predicting battery lifetime. It was observed that simplistic 

models are not effective, and the prediction was not better than a random prediction. 

Furt hermore, complex models including Gaussian Process Regression, Random Forest, Deep 

learning , etc. are tried to check the possibility of improving model accuracy with complex 

machine learning models. However, it was observed initially that complex machine learning 

models were also not that effective in predicting battery lifetime. 

After many unsuccessful model s and prediction attempts, it was come to notice that feature 

selection needs to be performed. Correlation analysis among the various input variables was 

explored . It was observed that m any of the variables were redundant and had high correlations .

Moreover, limited feature s were present which can provide useful information needed for better 

prediction. Therefore, feature selection wa s explored extensively to identify the influencing 

variables . Few of the aircraft state variable s needed to be preprocessed to include an overall 

history of battery usage than just instantaneous measurements. Therefore, features having 

cumulative state variable s are derived to provide an assess ment of the history of battery usage. 

Furthermore, the possibility of reduction of non -influencing features was explored using principal 

component analysis (PCA). The dataset was huge with more than 4 ,000,000 rows and 18 

variables. Feature selection was observed to highly important process in data -driven machine 

learning modeling on battery dataset s. Additionally, the possibility of generating and using a

synthetic dataset and its effectiveness was tested for battery lifetime prediction. However, it was 

observed that a synthetic dataset was not necessary as the original dataset was large enough to 

model the battery lifetime reasonably well. 

After feature selection, random forest and deep learning models started showing a prediction 

with better accuracy. The se models were further tuned to get optimized accuracy from each of 12 

these models. Finally, prediction errors from both models are compared on a new testing dataset 

based on performance comparison metrics like MSE, absolute error, and computational time to 

identify the best modelling framework suitable for battery lifetime prediction. 

The following is the list of anticipated outcomes using this methodology from this project. 

i) Important features which affect the lifetime of the battery. This information provides insights 

into identifying useful datasets and reducing computational time by reducing unnecessary 

information. Moreover, this would guide generate new data by designing experiments including 

important input features to build better models in the future. 

ii) Various data -driven models for predicting lifetime and their comparison on a common metric 

on unseen data. 

iii) The best -performing model would be used for predicting the lifetime of the battery. For a new 

input feature specifying battery conditions, the machine learning model would provide an 

estimate of a lifetime. 

## 4.1. Ethical Considerations 

The dataset used is openly available on NASA’s website under the NASA prognostics data 

repositor y. The source of the dataset is cited in the reference. Moreover, the dataset contains no 

information which could viol ate ethical norms. Any bias in the dataset was avoided by randomly 

selecting battery files among many and checking any inconsistency in the variables . There was 

no inconsistency or bias observed in the variables of the dataset. Moreover, during the feature 

selection process, it was observed that the same features were identified on different cells and 

no bias was observed in the dataset. The feature engineering was performed on state variables 

also performed to make sure the resultant variable were without any additional bias . During the 

project execution, ethical considerations were considered and all the information available is 

presented appropriately. Additiona lly, the open assess ment computational libraries were used 

for project implementation. The personal computing platform w as used for computing purpose s

without harming any entity or person. The results of the projects are communicated as the 

observed and detailed analysis was performed based on the available information from this 

project data .13 

## 4.2. Challenges 

The lifetime of batteries is influenced by a variety of factors in a non -linear complex form 

which makes it challenging to model . There are very limited datasets available publicly for battery 

lifetime because testing batteries is a cost ly and time -consuming process. Moreover, due to 

competitive , copyright , and license restrictions , many battery manufacturers do not make 

available or publish lifetime data publicly. Therefore, there is no diverse and large data available 

publicly . Moreover, available data al so needs to have many important features. The b attery is 

governed by highly complex mechanism s and to capture most mechanisms in the data -driven 

model, a rich dataset including high feature details may be required. Additionally, there are a 

few erroneous and missing values in the dataset. Handling these is challenging as removing these 

data could further reduce the amount of data. Furthermore, data with replicates is valuable for 

quantizing uncertainty in perdition including sample -to -sample variation . However, replicates are 

not available therefore uncertainty evaluation could not be p erformed .

The dataset used is a real -world battery dataset with many raw measurements which may 

not have a direct influence on battery lifetime. This was observed when model fitting on raw data 

was not showing good fit and prediction without any feature engineering. The challenging part 

was to perform feature engineering to identify features in a form that provide s information 

suitable for model fitting to predict battery lifetime. After an extensive understanding of input 

and response variables properties, an approp riate feature engineering method was identified to 

create new derived input variables which can account for the history of operation of the battery. 

This was crucial as battery lifetime is not just dependent on instantaneous variables but also 

depend on history of various variables. 14 

# 5. Results and Discussion 

# 5.1. Data Preprocessing 

The dataset available from the source was only available as a separate file for each battery 

test. Additionally, variable s were not stored in a n organized table or dataframe format. When data 

was loaded, it was observed that data was loading in dictionary format. This was because the data 

in the raw format was available in the mat file format . Moreover, the variables associated with 

battery state of charge estimates were in a separate structure . Th erefore, data preprocessing was 

necessary to convert this unstructured data into a structured table or python dataframe format. In 

data preprocessing, battery state of charge variables were appended to the other variables to have 

all the data in the table format. This was performed for each data file available for each battery 

experiment. The data in table format was then converted into a CSV file using a M atlab script .

CSV files for each experiment were used to access data and do further analysis in a python 

environment. As the data file for each experiment was loaded and combined resulting in a

significantly larger size with more than 4,000,000 rows and 18 columns. 

# 5.2. Feature Engineering 

When data was used in their original form, poor model fitting was observed. Therefore, it was 

noticed that the dependent variables in their original form do not provide valuable information for 

a good model building. Feature engineering was needed to convert the data variables in to a form 

that include valuable information about the state of battery lifetime. The original data format had 

instantaneous information about battery usage, but battery lifetime is dependent on the history of 

usage. Therefore, it was necessary to convert instantaneous information about battery usage into 

variables that can have information about the history of battery usage. 

Since the response variable in this dataset is dependent on functions of the predictor 

parameters, functional data analysis (FDA) seems like a natural option. FDA is a collection of 

statistical techniques specifically developed to analyze curve data (Frøslie, 2013). However, 

Yogev (2014) me ntions that it is a common practice to use simple summary measures, such as the 

area under the curve (AUC) to obtain information from the functions. Therefore, for this analysis 

estimated AUC for independent variables was used to predict the remaining battery life. 15 

The notion behind using AUC to determine remaining battery life is that all the predictors must 

be a function of power and responsible for battery consumption over time. Since the area under 

the power -time graph provides an estimate of energy consumption, the area under the predictor -

time curve will yield the proportion of lithium ions consumed over time in the battery . Applying 

this methodology to all the predictors provide s information about the number of Li thium ions 

consumed over time from the battery .

Thus, feature engineering was performed on the parameters by taking their AUC i.e., 

cumulative sum , and used them as subsequent va riables for prediction modeling. Figure 4 shows 

the plot for the original independent variable Revolutions per minute ( RPM ) over time. It can be 

observed that RPM values vary significantly ranging from 0 to as high as about 5000. The h igher 

the RPM more the Lithium -ion loss during operation and this instantaneous variable value is not 

a useful indicator of lifetime when used as it is. This RPM variable when converted with an AUC

summary measure to account for the history of the variable, the variable is highly helpful for 

lifetime prediction as Lithium -ion consumed is represented by an AUC summary measure well. 

Therefore, the cumulative sum of RPM over time is a newly created variable from this feature 

engineering . Figure 5 depicts the cumulative sum of RPM over time for the same instantaneous 

RPM data shown in figure 4. It can be observed that cumulative RPM indicates the area under the 

curve for instantaneous RPM and therefore provides a summary measure useful for battery lifetime 

prediction.      

> Figure 4:RPM response over time Figure 5:Cumulative sum of RPM over time 16

# 5.3. Correlation Analysis 

Since many predictors are functions of voltage, current, and temperature; a high correlation 

was observed among the parameters. Figure 3 shows the correlation plot among different predictor 

variables . The dark blue color indicates a high positive correlation whereas the dark red -brown 

color indicates a high negative correlation. There are 17 predictor variables in the data, and w e can 

observe that many predictors are highly correlated with each other. The correlation among the 

predictor variables is primarily positive. This is expected as many times an increase of one variable 

results in the increase of other in battery systems. For example, hi gh RPM is a result of high current 

withdrawn from the battery. It can also be noted that all the predictors are positively correlated. 

There is a high correlation between the first seven predictors and also between the remaining ten 

predictors. Therefore, two major clusters in the predictor variables have been id entified which can 

be used for dimensionality reduction. 

Figure 6: Correlation plot between covariates. 17 

# 5.4. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a powerful technique used to reduce dimensionality 

when predictors are high ly correlated. Using PCA, it is possible to keep the same information from 

the many variables with a significantly lower number of variables. Reduction of dimensionality 

was necessary to reduce the computational time of machine learning models as more predictor 

variables demand estimation of more model parameters which is time -consuming during model 

training. Moreover, reduced dimensionality of predictor variables also makes the model less 

complex with less number of model parameters. 

To reduce the dimensionality of the dataset, PCA was performed to determine the amount 

of variance that can be captured with a lower number of parameters. Figure 4 shows an elbow plot 

of the PCA results. We can see that the first two principal components captured 99% of the 

variance. Any additional PCA variable increases variance explained marginally. The noise in the 

data also contributes to the variance and therefore it is high ly recommended to have significant 

improvement in variance explained when an additional PCA variable is co nsidered. Clearly, only 

2 PCA variables provide 99% of the variation in the dataset . Therefore, the dimensional of 

predictor variables can be reduced to just 2 transformed variables using PCA without losing much 

information in the dataset . Since the dataset used has more than 4,000,000 data points, the 

dimensionality reduction from 17 predictor variables to just 2 variables by PCA means a 

significant reduction in computational cost. 

If 5 principal components are considered, then 99.999% of the variation in the dataset was 

captured. Therefore, 17 variables can be reduced to just 5 PCA variables without loss of 

information from the original predictor variables. Additional 3 PCA variables just provide 

information about 1% of the variation in predictor variables , however, for the predictive models 

where additional few predictor variables do not contribute sign ificant computational cost, 5 PCA 

variables can be considered. 

PCA is a powerful dimensionality reduction technique that helped reduce computational 

time significantly for the model training process. However, extra pre -processing was necessary to 

convert original predictor variables to PCA variables as PCA variables are linear combinations of 

the original predictor variables. Moreover, the original predictor variables to PCA variable 

transformation need to be ke pt the same on the testing dataset for model testing purposes. 18 

Figure 7: Cumulative variance explained by number of principal components .

# 5.5. Predicti ve modeling 

After performing feature engineering and PCA, the dataset was prepared for applying 

predicti ve algorithms. The distribution of the response variable is shown in Figure 8. This 

distribution is unique as it has positive values with uniform distribution for the initial range and 

exponential distribution at higher values. Clearly, generalized linear models of known distributions 

may not be suitable for modeling this response. Additionally, from the scientific understanding of 

battery and flight technologies, it is expected to have a non -linear relationship between covariates 

including many significant higher -order interactions. Predictive models which can capture non -

linear co mplex relationships with high -order interactions w ere needed for successful modeling of 

battery lifetime . Therefore, for data -driven predictive modeling , two prediction models based on 

Random Forest and Neural Network s were explored . These two machine learning models are the 

most versati le and robust predictive model s. Moreover, both model s are known for capturing 

complex non -linear relationships well . Additionally, real -world battery data might have a lot of 

noise which can be handled by these models well with the use of supervised learning. 19 

Figure 8: Histogram of remaining flight time response. 

5.5.1. Random Forest 

Random forests also referred to as random decision forests are an ensemble supervised 

learning model which uses multiple decision tre es to model fitting. The remaining useful life is a 

continuous variable therefore random forest regression model was used for fitting model fitting 

and training on predictor variables. To reduce computational time, only 2 PCA variables are 

considered as predictor variables with a remaining useful lifetime as a response variable for model 

tuning. For model training , 50 decision trees were considered on 2 principal components. 

Additionally, data from 8 experiments was the training dataset , and data from 1 experiment was 

considered the test dataset. This model performed well on the training set, with an MSE of 27431 ,

however, it showed some deviation from the actual values on the test data . The prediction vs actual 

response variable fit on test data is show n in Figure 9. Clearly, a significant deviation is observed 

from the actual response variable in the model prediction values for test data. 20   

> Figure 9:Prediction values vs actual values of remaining flight time using Random Forest model.

5.5.2. Neural Network 

Neural network models are powerful predictive models which can capture complex 

relationship s from a large dataset well. Therefore, a neural network is considered for building a 

predictive model. As a neural network model can perform variable selection on its own by 

assigning appropriate weights, the first five principal components which explain 99.999% of the 

variance are used as input predictors for this model. The number of hidden layers and nodes are 

varied to identify a better fitting model. 

A total of four neural network model configurations were considered. The first model with a 

single hidden layer of 3 nodes wa s built . Single hidden layers with t hree nodes are chosen as a 

starting network as a simple network configuration . The neural network model with weights and 

bias on this neural network model after training is shown in Figure 10 -(a) and the goodness of fit 

of prediction on a new battery -flight test data with this model is shown in Figure 10 -(b). The 

predicted values are a little off from the actual values. It can be obser ved that this model under -

predicts most of the time with a small over -prediction towards the end. The MSE on prediction is 

35763 for this model. The model appears to be n ot complex enough to capture the relationship 

between the predictor variables. 21 

Figure 10 -(a): Weights and Bias in Neural Net of single hidden layer of 3 nodes 

Figure 10 -(b): Goodness of fit for Neural Net of single hidden layer of 3 nodes 22 

Furthermore, a second model with a single hidden layer of 5 nodes wa s considered . The hope 

was the additional nodes in the model would help capture complex relationship s and interactions 

between predictors well . The higher nodes would add additional weight and bias parameters to the 

models and therefore more complex model s with more computational time for training. Figure 11 -

(a) shows the weights and bias from the trained neural net and Figure 11 -(b) shows the goodness 

of fit prediction plot for this neural network model . It can be observed that prediction accuracy is 

increase d with 5 nodes model significantly compared to the previous model of 3 nodes. The 

predict ed time is following the actual time very closely all the time. Figure 11 -(b) clearly illustrates 

the significant reduction in prediction error and well -matching of predicted values of time to actual 

values. The MSE of the prediction is significantly reduced to 2717 . Clearly, the addition of 2 nodes 

to the neural network helped reduced MSE by 92 %. The higher complexity of the model with the 

addition of 2 nodes is well justified by such a significant reduction in the MSE .

Figure 1 1-(a): Weights and Bias in Neural Net of single hidden layer of 5 nodes 23 

Figure 1 1-(b): Goodness of fit for Neural Net of a single hidden layer of 5 nodes 

Further , complex deep learning neural net configurations were also explored. The neural net 

configurations with two hidden layers with the first layer of 5 nodes and the second layer of 1 node 

are trained. The model configuration with values of weights and bias es after training is shown in 

Figure12 -(a). Also, the goodness of fit with two hidden layer model s with 5 nodes in the first layer 

and a node in the s ingle layer is shown in Figure 12 -(b). It is observed that prediction accuracy 

decreases for th is model compa red to the single -layer network of 5 nodes . The MSE value on test 

data was 11896 . Clearly, 338% higher MSE was observed over the MSE of a single layer of 5 

nodes. 

Although two hidden layer model show ed poor fit with higher MSE on test data, another two 

hidden model with more nodes with 5 nodes in the first layer and 3 nodes in the second layer is 

explored to confirm and understand the possibility of improvement of model fitting with additional 

nodes in the second layer. Figure 13 -(a) shows the network configuration with weights and bias 

values after training and Figure13 -(b) shows the goodness of fit with this network configuration 

on test data. The model with the first layer of 5 nodes and the second l ayer of 3 nodes also showed 

poor prediction performance with an MSE of 15709. It is observed that prediction is significantly 

worse with 2 -layer model s than with the singl e-layer 5 -node model. Although training error 

decreased with the complex neural network, prediction error on test data was observed to be the 24 

least with the model having a single layer of 5 nodes. Therefore, a single -layer model with 5 nodes 

is the best model with the neural network modeling approach. 

Figure 12 -(a): Weights and Bias in Neural Net of 2 Layer s with 5 nodes in the first layer and 1

node in the second layer .

Figure 12 -(b): Goodness of fit for Neural Net of 2 Layer s with 5 nodes in the first layer and 3 

nodes in the second layer .25 

Figure 1 3-(a): Weights and Bias in Neural Net of 2 Layer s with 5 nodes in the first layer and 3 

nodes in the second layer .

Figure 1 3-(b): Goodness of fit for Neural Net of 2 Layer s with 5 nodes in the first layer and 3 

nodes in the second layer .26 

# 5.5.3. Model Comparison 

The prediction performance of Random Forest and Neural Network is compared in terms 

of prediction accuracy, computational time, and robustness of the model in handling higher 

dimensional data. Prediction accuracy is measured in terms of MSE on test data for model 

comparison. The approximate t ime required for training the model was considered as a measure 

of computational time . The robustness of the model was considered based on the model’s ability 

to handle high -dimensional data without the need for dimensi onality reduction. Table 1. provides 

performance measures of the Random Forest model and various neural network models considered 

in this study. Prediction MSE for the best Neural Network model was 2717 whereas Prediction 

MSE for the Random Forest model was 27431. Clearly, the neural network modeling approach 

showed a significantly smaller prediction error. However, the computational time required for 

training neural network s was significantly higher (about 3 times) even with a reduced data set. 

Additionally, neural network s can handle feature selection whereas Random Forest requires a 

feature selection process before model building. Therefore, the top two principal components were 

used for random forest whereas the top five principal components wer e considered for neural 

network models. Neural network models are more robust in handling high -dimensional data than 

random forest models . Just based on MSE of prediction on test data , a neural network model with 

a single hidden layer of 5 nodes is observed to be the best model for prediction of battery lifetime. 

Table 1 : Model comparison for Random Forest and various neural networks (NN) models on 

battery dataset. 

Model  Test MSE  Computational Time  Robustness 

Random Forest  27431  ~ 10 minutes  Low 

NN -Single Layer 3 nodes  35763  ~ 30 minutes  High 

NN - Single Layer 5 nodes  2717  ~ 35 minutes  High 

NN - Double Layer (5,1) nodes  11896  ~ 50 minutes  High 

NN - Double Layer (5,3) nodes  15709  ~ 55 minutes  High 27 

# 6. Conclusions 

Data -driven modeling approach was explored to predict the Lithium -ion battery lifetim e based 

on batter y data for electric -powered aircraft, using the measures of aircraft state and battery SOC s

over its usage . It was observed that feature engineering was necessary for predictive model 

building . Features that provide battery utilization information over its operation w ere needed. 

Therefore, new feature s were generated from the original instantaneous battery utilization 

information to provide battery utilization over its past operation using the area under the curve 

measures. Additionally, many features had a high correla tion to other features therefore 

dimensionality reduction was explored using principal component analysis. 

After feature engineering and principal component analysis, two predictive models were 

developed based on Random Forest and Neural Network models . For the random forest model 

ensemble model based on 50 decision tr ees was bui lt using training data . The p rediction MSE on 

test data was considered as a performance metric for model comparison. Moreover, the goodness 

of fit plot was considered to see visually how model predictions fit to the actual lifetime data. For 

the exploration of neural network models, f our neural network configurations were considered in 

this study. These four model configurations include a single layer with 3 nodes, a single layer with 

5 nodes, double layers with 5 nodes in the first layer and 1 node in the second layer , and a double 

layer with 5 nodes in the first layer and 3 nodes in the second layer . All four neural network models 

were trained to evaluate weight s and bias parameters of the model using 5 principal components 

as inputs and full training data. It was observed that the neural network model with a signal layer 

with 5 nodes is the best model for MSE performance metric on test data. Clearly, too less nodes 

underfit or too excess nodes in neural network results in overfit ting . The MSE on training data was 

consistently decreasing with higher nodes , however, after optimal node configuration , MSE on test 

data was increasing. This clearly highlights optimal node configuration should be decided based 

on MSE on test data. 

Overall, t he best neural network model had an MSE of 2717 whereas the pr ediction MSE for 

the Random Forest model was 27431 on the test data . Clearly based on MSE, the n eural network 

model performed better and yielded better predictions of battery lifetime. Moreover , the 

computational time for training neural network models was 3 time s higher than random forest 28 

models. This higher computational time is justified as over 90% reduction in MSE is observed 

with the best neural network model. Furthermore, the neural network model was more robust as it 

could handle higher dimensional data without the need for extensive dimensional reduction. The 

model comparison clearly high lights the accuracy and robustness of neural network models 

compared to Random Forest models for battery lifetime prediction. Therefore, it is possible to 

predict battery lifetime using real -world battery data using a data -driven modelling approach with 

reasonable accuracy. 

# 7. Future work 

This study primarily considered the two most versatile machine learning models, many more 

models can be explored beyond Random Forest and Neural network models. Moreover, battery 

lifetime prediction for different application s can be explored using a data -driven modelling 

approach. One important aspect for the data -driven modeling approach for battery lifetime 

prediction was feature engineering and high correlation of predictor variables. It is important to 

measure appropriate data on battery for accurate lifetime prediction. Therefore, a dditional 

analysis can be explored to identify methods to reduce data dimensionality at the time of battery 

data measurement itself so that more informative variables were included as part of battery 

management system measureme nts .

Further research and developmen t of other models such as functional regression, hybrid 

models using physics -based model and machine learning models for more accurate and robust 

battery lifetime estimate . Additionally, quantification of uncertainty measures for the prediction 

could be explored to identify data -driven models with low er uncertainty of prediction s. This is 

highly desired for critical application s where battery lifetime prediction needs to be with lower 

uncertainty. Overall, this study explores a small aspect of possible modeling approaches for 

battery lifetime prediction. Many more approaches still remain to be explored for more accurate, 

computationally effective and reliable battery lifetime prediction. 29 

# References 

Argonne National Laboratory (202 2), ‘Machine Learning Prognosis for Battery Life and 

Performance’, Available at: https://www.anl.gov/egs/machine -learning -prognosis -for -battery -

life -and -performance (Accessed: 10 Ju ne 202 2)

BatteryBits  (2020), ‘Comparison of Open Datasets for Lithium -ion Battery Testing’, Medium, 12 

December. Available at: https://medium.com/batterybits/comparison -of -open -datasets -for -

lithium -ion -battery -testing -fd0de091ca2 (Accessed: 11 Ju ne 202 2)

Climate Central (2019), ‘Climate Central Solutions Brief: Battery Energy Storage’, ClimateCentral, 

13 November. Available at: https://www.climatecentral.org/news/climate -central -solutions -

brief -battery -energy -storage (Accessed: 11 Ju ne 202 2)

Fei, Z., Yang, F., Tsui, K.L., Li, L. and Zhang, Z., 2021. Early prediction of battery lifetime via a 

machine learning based framework. Energy, 225, p.120205. 

Frøslie, K. F., Røislien, J., Qvigstad, E., Godang, K., Bollerslev, J., Voldner, N., & Veierød , M. B. 

(2013). Shape information from glucose curves: functional data analysis compared with 

traditional summary measures. BMC medical research methodology, 13(1), 6. 

Hosen, M.S., Jaguemont, J., Van Mierlo, J. and Berecibar, M., 2021. Battery lifetime prediction 

and performance assessment of different modeling approaches. Iscience, 24(2), p.102060. 

NASA Prognostics Data Repository , B. Saha and K. Goebel (2007). "Battery Data Set", NASA 

Prognostics Data Repository, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 

Pistoia, G. 2013, Lithium -ion batteries: advances and applications. Newnes. 

Severson, K.A., Attia, P.M., Jin, N., Perkins, N., Jiang, B., Yang, Z., Chen, M.H., Aykol, M., Herring, 

P.K., Fraggedakis, D. and Bazant, M.Z., 2019. Data -driven prediction of battery cycle life before 

capacity degradation. Nature Energy, 4(5), pp.383 -391. 30 

U.S. Department of Energy (202 1), ‘NREL Advances In Battery Research With Physics -Based 

Machine Learning Accelerates Characterization Of Cell Performance, Lifetime, & Safety’, 

Cleantechnica, 1 9 February 202 1. Available at:  https://cleantechnica.com/2021/02/19/nrel -

advances -in -battery -research -with -physics -based -machine -learning -accelerates -

characterization -of -cell -performance -lifetime -safety/  (Accessed : 11 Ju ne 202 2).

Yogev Y, Ben -Haroush A, Chen R, Rosenn B, Hod M, Langer O: Diurnal glycemic profile in obese 

and normal weight nondiabetic pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004, 191: 949 -953. 

10.1016/j.ajog.2004.06.059. 

Yoshio, M., Brodd, R.J. and Kozawa, A. 2009, Lithium -ion batteries (Vol. 1). New York: Springer. 

Zhang, P., Liang, J. and Zhang, F., 2017, May. An overview of different approaches for battery 

lifetime prediction. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 199, No. 1, 

p. 012134). IOP Publishing. 

Zhu, S., Zhao, N. and Sha, J., 2019. Predicting battery life with early cyclic data by machine 

learning. Energy Storage, 1(6), p. e98.