Title: Event-Level Detection of Surgical Instrument Handovers in Videos with Interpretable Vision Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07577v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:17:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Event-Level Detection of Surgical Instrument Handovers in Videos with Interpretable Vision Models 

# Katerina Katsarou 1∗*†‡ George Zountsas 12 * Karam Tomotaki-Dawoud 1 Alexander Ehrenhoefer 12 

# Paul Chojecki 1 David Przewozny 1 Detlef Runde 1 Igor Maximilian Sauer 3

# Amira Mouakher 4 Sebastian Bosse 11Fraunhofer HHI, Berlin, Germany 2Technical University of Berlin, Germany 

> 3

# Charit´ e - Universit¨ atsmedizin Berlin, Germany 4Universit´ e de Perpignan, Perpignan, France 

# Abstract 

Reliable monitoring of surgical instrument exchanges is es-sential for maintaining procedural efficiency and patient safety in the operating room. Automatic detection of in-strument handovers in intraoperative video remains chal-lenging due to frequent occlusions, background clutter, and the temporally evolving nature of interaction events. We propose a spatiotemporal vision framework for event-level detection and direction classification of surgical instrument handovers in surgical videos. The model combines a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone for spatial feature extraction with a unidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network for temporal aggregation. A unified multi-task for-mulation jointly predicts handover occurrence and inter-action direction, enabling consistent modeling of transfer dynamics while avoiding error propagation typical of cas-caded pipelines. Predicted confidence scores form a tem-poral signal over the video, from which discrete handover events are identified via peak detection. Experiments on a dataset of kidney transplant procedures demonstrate strong performance, achieving an F1-score of 0.84 for handover detection and a mean F1-score of 0.72 for direction clas-sification, outperforming both a single-task variant and a VideoMamba-based baseline for direction prediction while maintaining comparable detection performance. To im-prove interpretability, we employ Layer-CAM attribution to visualize spatial regions driving model decisions, highlight-ing hand–instrument interaction cues. 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author: email
> aikaterini.katsarou@hhi.fraunhofer.de
> ‡This research was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) with project Kiara [grant: 16SV9036].
> 0The source code is available on our Git.

# 1. Introduction 

The operating room represents a high-stakes clinical envi-ronment in which procedural efficiency and patient safety must be simultaneously maintained. Among the factors influencing surgical workflow quality is the seamless ex-change of instruments between the surgeon and the assis-tant. Instrument handovers are fundamental to preserving procedural flow, reducing interruptions, and sustaining cog-nitive continuity during surgery. Disruptions or inefficien-cies during these interactions may contribute to workflow interruptions, prolonged procedure times, and increased risks of error. Beyond workflow efficiency, reliable instru-ment exchange is closely linked to patient safety. Fail-ures in instrument countability remain a contributing fac-tor to adverse events such as retained surgical instruments (RSIs), a preventable yet clinically significant complication associated with substantial medical and economic conse-quences [20]. Reliable monitoring of instrument transfers is therefore essential not only for optimizing surgical work-flows but also for supporting procedural safety. These chal-lenges motivate the development of automated systems ca-pable of analyzing surgical interactions directly from intra-operative video data. Recent advances in artificial intelligence and computer vision have enabled vision-based analysis of surgical en-vironments, including instrument tracking, action recogni-tion, and workflow understanding. Transformer-based ar-chitectures have demonstrated strong representation learn-ing capabilities by modeling complex spatial dependen-cies. Prior work has explored the integration of large-scale pretrained visual models for surgical scene understanding. For instance, the SurgiGuard framework [17] leveraged CLIP-based visual representations combined with graph-based reasoning to detect surgical instrument handovers and model relationships between surgical entities. By combin-ing vision-based representations with knowledge graphs, 

> arXiv:2604.07577v1 [cs.CV] 8 Apr 2026

SurgiGuard demonstrated the feasibility of automated in-teraction detection and visualization. Despite these advances, automatic handover detection remains highly challenging in real clinical environments. Intraoperative videos acquired during live surgical proce-dures exhibit severe occlusions, cluttered backgrounds, dy-namic illumination, and substantial viewpoint variability. Moreover, handover interactions are inherently temporal phenomena unfolding across multiple frames, rendering frame-level representations alone is insufficient for captur-ing transfer dynamics. These characteristics motivate spa-tiotemporal architectures capable of jointly modeling spa-tial structure and temporal evolution. In this work, we propose a framework for surgical in-strument handover analysis using intraoperative videos col-lected from real surgical procedures. Unlike approaches evaluated on simulated or laboratory-controlled recordings, the proposed approach is designed for unconstrained clini-cal environments characterized by visual complexity, back-ground clutter, and frequent occlusions. The framework adopts an event-level formulation on a multi-task spatiotem-poral architecture that combines a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone for spatial feature extraction with a unidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network for temporal modeling over short video windows. The model jointly pre-dicts handover occurrence and directionality, distinguish-ing between assistant-to-surgeon and surgeon-to-assistant transfers. To improve robustness under visually complex surgi-cal conditions, the framework incorporates data augmen-tation strategies as a preprocessing step during training to reduce the influence of irrelevant visual cues. Sequence-level predictions are aggregated into event-level detections, enabling clinically meaningful evaluation aligned with the perceptual characteristics of handover events. For compar-ative analysis, the proposed approach is evaluated against a VideoMamba-based temporal architecture designed for long-context sequence modeling. Finally, we employ the Layer-CAM attribution method [15] to analyze the spatial regions contribut-ing to model decisions. This analysis provides insight into the visual cues driving predictions. Such interpretability is particularly valuable in surgical scenes, where critical regions, such as hands and instruments, often occupy small spatial extents and may be partially occluded. Experimental evaluation on intraoperative videos from kidney transplant procedures demonstrates strong perfor-mance for both detection and direction classification tasks. The proposed approach achieves an event-level detection F1-score of 0.84 and a mean direction classification F1-score of 0.72. Compared with a VideoMamba-based base-line, the method achieves comparable detection perfor-mance while providing improved direction classification ac-curacy. Our contributions are twofold: • An event-level formulation for surgical instrument handover detection validated on intraoperative videos from real surgical procedures , enabling robust analysis despite severe occlusions, background clutter, and tempo-ral ambiguity. • A multi-task ViT–LSTM architecture for jointly mod-eling handover occurrence and directionality, together with a systematic comparison against a VideoMamba-based temporal model to examine the impact of differ-ent temporal modeling strategies. We further provide an interpretable analysis of model behavior using the Layer-CAM attribution method, offering insight into the visual cues driving predictions and grounding the architectural findings in spatially meaningful evidence. 

# 2. Related Work 

Recent advances in artificial intelligence have significantly influenced medical imaging and surgical workflow analy-sis. Vision-based models have been widely explored for understanding clinical environments, including radiologi-cal interpretation, procedural analysis, and surgical activ-ity recognition. Large-scale pretrained architectures and transformer-based models have demonstrated strong repre-sentation learning capabilities, motivating their adoption in complex medical visual domains. Computer vision techniques have been extensively ap-plied to surgical workflow understanding, including phase recognition, tool detection, and action recognition [16, 26, 35]. EndoNet demonstrated early success in jointly modeling surgical phases and tool presence from laparo-scopic videos [35]. Subsequent work emphasized higher-level interaction reasoning, including recognition of in-strument–action–target relationships to capture fine-grained surgical activities [26]. Prior studies have further explored surgical phase and action recognition using deep architec-tures and attention-based mechanisms [8, 21, 35]. Beyond individual actions, group activity recognition in operating room environments has gained attention, where interactions among multiple clinical actors must be mod-eled under severe occlusions and visual clutter [3, 5, 12, 39]. These works highlight the complexity of surgical scene un-derstanding and the need for models capable of capturing both spatial structure and interaction dynamics. Transformer-based architectures[37] have shown strong performance in visual representation learning by model-ing long-range spatial dependencies through self-attention mechanisms [7, 25]. ViTs have been successfully adopted in medical imaging tasks, improving contextual modeling and robustness in visually complex settings [2, 13, 36]. More recently, transformer-based architectures have been explored for surgical video understanding and workflow analysis. Approaches such as Trans-SVNet [9] leverage hy-brid spatial–temporal transformer embeddings for surgical phase recognition, while models like LoViT [24] incorpo-rate long-range temporal attention to capture dependencies across extended surgical procedures. ViT models have also been applied to decode intraoperative surgical activity di-rectly from video recordings [19]. Temporal reasoning is central to surgical video un-derstanding, as clinically meaningful events unfold over time. Recurrent neural networks, particularly LSTM net-works, have been widely used for modeling sequential de-pendencies in medical video data [14, 16, 35]. Alterna-tive approaches such as Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs) employ hierarchical temporal convolutions for ac-tion segmentation and detection [22]. Temporal modeling strategies have also been investigated for surgical phase seg-mentation and workflow analysis [4, 41]. More recently, structured state space models have been proposed for effi-cient long-range sequence modeling [10, 11]. In the video domain, VideoMamba extends these ideas to enable effi-cient modeling of extended temporal contexts [23]. These methods provide complementary perspectives to recurrent approaches for capturing temporal dynamics. Large pretrained vision–language models such as CLIP enable alignment between visual patterns and semantic con-cepts [28, 42]. Prior work demonstrated the utility of CLIP-based representations in medical imaging and multimodal reasoning tasks [38, 42]. The SurgiGuard framework [17] combined CLIP-based visual representations with knowl-edge graph reasoning to detect surgical instrument han-dovers and model relationships among surgical entities. While this approach demonstrated the feasibility of auto-mated interaction detection and visualization, its reliance on frame-level reasoning limited explicit modeling of temporal dynamics. Over the years, numerous explanation methods across various categories have been proposed and extensively stud-ied to unravel the complexities of black-box models [31]. These include interpretable local surrogates [29], occlusion analysis [40], gradient-based methods (e.g., SmoothGrad [33] and Integrated Gradients [34]), and Layer-wise Rele-vance Propagation (LRP) [1]. However, user-centered eval-uations demonstrate that while these methods may high-light different image regions, they can provide humans with comparable levels of understanding for image classification tasks [6]. The significance of such methods is particularly evident in clinical AI systems, where interpretability is es-sential for trustworthy decision-making [30]. For instance, gradient-based attribution techniques such as Grad-CAM localize image regions pertinent to model decisions [32], while Layer-CAM refines spatial localization by utilizing activation maps across multiple layers [15]. Furthermore, recent work underscores the importance of interpretabil-ity in medical imaging systems, especially under condi-tions of uncertainty and occlusion. In particular, novel hybrid approaches that integrate explainability with uncer-tainty quantification have been proposed to enhance clinical credibility and decision robustness [30]. In this work, we apply Layer-CAM and a variation of the Integrated Gradi-ents method to explain the spatio-temporal relevance of se-quence inputs to the VideoMamba and our proposed model architecture, demonstrating that these models attend to crit-ical regions of the input sequence that determine whether an instrument handover occurred and its direction. Building upon prior vision-based approaches for surgical interaction analysis, the proposed framework introduces ex-plicit spatiotemporal modeling for surgical instrument han-dover detection. In contrast to the SurgiGuard framework [17], which primarily relies on frame-level CLIP repre-sentations combined with graph-based reasoning, our ap-proach integrates a ViT backbone with LSTM-based tempo-ral modeling to jointly capture spatial features and temporal dependencies across video frames. Additionally, by adopt-ing an event-level formulation and incorporating Layer-CAM attribution techniques, the framework facilitates in-terpretable analysis of handover events in intraoperative videos recorded during real surgical procedures. 

# 3. The Proposed Method 

We address surgical instrument handover analysis as a joint detection and classification problem over short temporal windows. Rather than treating handover detection and di-rection estimation as separate stages, we adopt a unified multi-task formulation that jointly optimizes both objec-tives. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed architecture combines transformer-based spatial feature extraction with recurrent temporal modeling. Given a sequence of sampled video frames, spatial representations are first computed in-dependently using a ViT backbone. The resulting frame-level features are then projected into a compact embedding space and processed by a unidirectional LSTM network to capture temporal dependencies. The final LSTM represen-tation is shared by two task-specific prediction heads cor-responding to binary handover detection and direction clas-sification. This design encourages the learning of event-consistent spatiotemporal representations while mitigating the error propagation effects commonly observed in cas-caded pipelines. 

3.1. Problem Formulation 

Let a video be represented as a sequence of RGB frames 

V = {It}Nt=1 , where It ∈ RH×W ×3 denotes the frame at time t.For each time index t, we construct a temporal input se-quence by sampling T = 8 frames from the video with a fixed temporal stride sf = 4 :Figure 1. Overview of the proposed architecture. Spatial features are extracted independently from sampled video frames using a ViT backbone, projected into a compact embedding space, and temporally aggregated via a unidirectional LSTM. The shared spatiotemporal representation is jointly optimized using task-specific heads for handover detection and direction classification. 

Xt = {It, It+sf , It+2 sf , . . . , It+( T −1) sf }. (1) Each sequence therefore spans a temporal context of 

(T − 1) sf + 1 = 29 frames. Each video frame is associ-ated with a label y ∈ { 0, 1, 2} corresponding to the classes 

assistant receives , assistant gives , and assistant idle , where the latter refers to frames in which the assistant is neither re-ceiving nor giving an instrument. A majority vote is taken over the five central frames of a sequence to determine its label. This labeling scheme ensures that the model observes sufficient context around the interaction, as well as the in-teraction itself. 

3.2. Spatial Feature Extraction 

Each sampled frame within a temporal window is indepen-dently encoded using a ViT. Given an input frame Iτ , the backbone first extracts a high-dimensional feature vector, which is then projected into a compact embedding space for temporal modeling: 

eτ = g(fViT (Iτ )) , eτ ∈ RD , (2) where fViT (·) denotes the ViT backbone, g(·) is a learn-able linear projection layer, and D = 64 is the embedding dimension. Dropout regularization is applied to the pro-jected embeddings to improve generalization. During train-ing, the first 18 transformer layers of the ViT backbone are frozen, while the higher layers are fine-tuned to adapt the spatial representations to the handover analysis task. For a temporal window of length T , the resulting embed-ding sequence is 

E = [ e1, e2, . . . , eT ] ∈ RT ×D. (3) 

3.3. Temporal Modeling 

Temporal dependencies are modeled using a unidirectional LSTM network. This design choice reflects the statisti-cal characteristics of intraoperative video data, where an-notated datasets are typically limited in scale and exhibit sparse event distributions. While transformer-based tempo-ral models offer high representational capacity, they rely on weak sequential inductive bias and often require substan-tially larger datasets to ensure stable optimization. In con-trast, recurrent architectures impose an explicit temporal or-dering constraint and provide a strong sequential inductive bias, which is well-suited for modeling short interaction sequences with limited temporal diversity. Moreover, the proposed framework delegates complex spatial dependency modeling to the ViT backbone, allowing the LSTM to fo-cus on lightweight temporal aggregation of frame-level em-beddings. This separation reduces model complexity while preserving sensitivity to the temporal evolution of handover events. At each time step t, the LSTM updates its hidden state: ht = fLSTM (et, ht−1), (4) where ht ∈ RH denotes the hidden state. The final hid-den state summarizes the temporal evolution of the sampled window and serves as a compact sequence-level representa-tion: 

z = hT . (5) 

3.4. Multi-Task Prediction Heads 

The shared representation z is passed to two task-specific prediction heads. 

Handover Detection Head We model handover detection as a binary classification problem: 

ˆpdet = σ(Wdet z + bdet ), (6) where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function. 

Direction Classification Head Direction classification is formulated as a categorical prediction: 

ˆpdir = softmax (Wdir z + bdir ), (7) where ˆpdir ∈ R2 corresponds to assistant receives and 

assistant gives .

3.5. Learning Objective 

The network is trained via a multi-task objective combining detection and direction losses. 

Detection Loss The binary detection label ydet is derived from the original label y as 

ydet = 1 [y ∈ { 0, 1}] , (8) where 1[·] denotes the indicator function. To address class imbalance between handover and non-handover win-dows, we employ weighted binary cross-entropy: 

Ldet = −wpos ydet log ˆ pdet − (1 − ydet ) log(1 − ˆpdet ), (9) where wpos controls the contribution of positive samples. 

Direction Loss Direction supervision is applied only to positive detection samples, i.e., when ydet = 1 . For such samples, the direction loss is 

Ldir = WCE(ˆ pdir , y dir ) , (10) where WCE( ·) denotes the weighted cross-entropy loss. The direction label is derived from the ground-truth class label as  ydir = y. 

Total Loss The full training objective is: 

L = λdet Ldet + λdir Ldir , (11) where λdet and λdir balance the contributions of detec-tion and direction objectives. The multi-task formulation encourages the learning of shared spatiotemporal represen-tations that capture both event occurrence and interaction semantics, while reducing error propagation effects typical of cascaded pipelines. 

3.6. VideoMamba Comparison Model 

To contextualize the proposed Multi-Task ViT–LSTM ar-chitecture, we evaluated a comparison model based on VideoMamba [23], a state-space model designed for ef-ficient temporal modeling in video. In contrast to transformer-based temporal attention, whose cost grows quadratically with sequence length, VideoMamba relies on structured state-space operators with approximately linear complexity, enabling a longer temporal context at compara-ble compute. To be comparable to the Multi-Task ViT–LSTM, we con-struct input clips of 8 frames sampled with a temporal stride of 4 (covering 29 frames of temporal extent). Two Video-Mamba models were trained separately: One instance was optimized for the prediction of general handover events, while the second model was specifically trained to infer the directional outcome within a given handover sequence. We employ a VideoMamba-Middle backbone pretrained on Kinetics-400[18]. The original classification head is re-placed with a lightweight projection head (four linear lay-ers) mapping the 576-dimensional CLS token to one out-put prediction. During fine-tuning, only the last 12 of 24 Mamba blocks are updated while earlier blocks remain frozen. Clip-level targets are assigned using the center frame label; during training, we apply a relaxed majority-vote labeling within a ±2 frame neighborhood to reduce sensitivity to annotation jitter near event boundaries. 

# 4. Experiments 

Preprocessing. To reduce label noise and improve an-notation reliability, candidate handover instances were ex-cluded from training if they exhibited: (1) ambiguous inter-actions, (2) severe occlusions preventing reliable interpre-tation, or (3) multiple simultaneous handovers within the same temporal interval. 

Dataset Details. Dataset construction followed a two-stage procedure. First, temporal segments containing sur-gical instrument handover interactions were manually ex-tracted from continuous intraoperative recordings. Second, the extracted segments were annotated at the frame level with labels specifying both handover occurrence and direc-tionality. The final dataset consists of 484 annotated han-dover events in both directions, including 334 assistant-to-surgeon and 150 surgeon-to-assistant interactions, collected from five real kidney transplant surgeries. One surgery and its corresponding 50 handover events are reserved as a test set, while the remaining 434 events are used for model train-ing and validation. 

Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate the models along two complementary dimensions: (i) handover detection and (ii) handover direction classification. Detection is treated as a temporal event localization problem operating on sequence-level confidence scores, while direction is evaluated independently of detection to avoid compounding errors. For detection, model outputs are converted into a one-dimensional temporal confidence signal over time (Fig. 2). Each prediction corresponds to an input sequence of eight frames sampled with a frame stride of four, while consecutive sequences are generated with a sequence stride of two. For the evaluation, a sequence is labeled as a handover if it contains at least one handover frame. The temporal confidence signal is smoothed using a Gaussian filter ( σ = 3 , kernel size = 15 ) to suppress noise and stabilize local maxima. To reduce boundary ar-tifacts during filtering, reflective padding of 3σ is applied. Handover candidates are then extracted using prominence-based peak detection with a minimum peak height of 0.1

and a prominence threshold of 1% of the signal range for each extracted video segment. Detected peaks are matched to ground-truth handover events using a temporal tolerance of two sequences around the annotated handover interval. This tolerance accounts for minor temporal misalignment introduced by sequence sampling and temporal smoothing. For direction evaluation, predictions are aggregated within each ground-truth handover interval using Gaussian-weighted temporal aggregation. This weighting emphasizes predictions near the center of the event while reducing the influence of temporally misaligned or boundary-near pre-dictions. The aggregated confidence produces a single di-rection prediction per handover event, which is thresholded at 0.5 to determine the final handover direction. 

Detection Performance. Detection results are summa-rized in Table 1. All evaluated models operate on the same temporal input consisting of eight sampled frames per se-quence, enabling a consistent comparison across architec-tures. The multi-task ViT–LSTM achieves a detection F1 score of 0.84, with a balanced precision–recall trade-off (precision 0.81, recall 0.86). The single-task ViT–LSTM achieves a higher precision of 0.97 but a substantially lower recall of 0.66, resulting in an overall F1 score of 0.79. This behavior indicates that optimizing solely for detection en-0 20 40 60 80     

> Sequence Index
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> (Smoothed) Confidence
> Prediction
> Ground Truth
> Figure 2. Handover detection evaluation approach applied to a video snippet from an actual surgical procedure, which includes two handover events. The smoothed temporal signal is depicted in blue and the grey shaded region indicates the ground truth, defined as the sequences containing at least one handover frame. Table 1. Classification metrics for handover detection and di-rection performance (50 handovers). Detection uses Gaussian smoothing and prominence-based peak detection with a temporal tolerance of two windows. Direction is evaluated independently using Gaussian-weighted aggregation within ground-truth inter-vals. F1@R and F1@G denote the class-wise F1 scores for the assistant-receives and assistant-gives directions, respectively.

Detection Performance 

Model Precision Recall F1 Multi-task ViT–LSTM 0.81 0.86 0.84 Single-task ViT–LSTM 0.97 0.66 0.79 VideoMamba 0.82 0.86 0.84 

Direction Performance 

Model F1@R F1@G Mean Multi-task ViT–LSTM 0.70 0.74 0.72 Single-task ViT–LSTM 0.55 0.70 0.63 VideoMamba 0.60 0.61 0.61 courages more conservative predictions that reduce false positives but miss a larger number of true handover events. The VideoMamba model achieves a detection F1 score of 0.84, matching the multi-task ViT–LSTM. Its perfor-mance is characterized by a balanced precision–recall pro-file (0.82 precision, 0.86 recall), suggesting that the state-space temporal modeling employed by VideoMamba effec-tively captures the temporal dynamics of surgical instru-ment exchanges while maintaining stable event localization. 

Direction Performance. Direction classification results are summarized in Table 1, with normalized confusion matrices for the multi-task ViT–LSTM and VideoMamba shown in Fig. 3. Among the evaluated models, the multi-task ViT–LSTM achieves the best overall performance, with a mean F1 score of 0.72, including 0.70 for assistant-receives interactions and 0.74 for assistant-gives interac-tions. Table 1 shows that performance is relatively balanced across both interaction types, although assistant-receives Figure 3. Normalized confusion matrices comparing multi-task ViT–LSTM and VideoMamba. 

events remain slightly more difficult to classify correctly. For the single-task ViT–LSTM, the direction model is obtained by sequential fine-tuning from the detection checkpoint. This model achieves F1@R = 0.55 and F1@G = 0.70, with a mean F1 score of 0.63, where F1@R and F1@G denote the class-wise F1 scores for the assistant-receives and assistant-gives directions, respectively. The VideoMamba direction model is also initialized from the detection checkpoint and further fine-tuned for direction classification. It achieves F1@R = 0.60 and F1@G = 0.61, with a mean F1 score of 0.61, showing more bal-anced performance between the two interaction types than the single-task ViT–LSTM, although its overall F1 score re-mains lower than that of the multi-task model. Overall, the normalized confusion matrices for the multi-task ViT–LSTM and VideoMamba shown in Fig. 3 confirm that direction classification remains challenging, while also highlighting the stronger recall achieved by the multi-task model. Since the matrices are normalized with respect to the ground-truth labels, the diagonal entries correspond to class-wise recall. The multi-task ViT–LSTM achieves recall values of 62% for assistant-receives and 89% for assistant-gives, whereas VideoMamba achieves 51% and 74%, re-spectively. Thus, assistant-gives is recognized more reli-ably than assistant-receives in both models, and the multi-task formulation improves recall for both interaction di-rections. This lower performance likely reflects both the smaller number of training instances available for direction classification and the visual similarity of hand trajectories during instrument transfer, particularly under partial occlu-sions, motion blur, and limited visibility of the exchanged instrument in real surgical scenes. 

Computational Complexity. To complement the perfor-mance evaluation, Table 2 reports the computational char-acteristics of the compared architectures using the same 8-frame input sequence. The multi-task ViT–LSTM model contains approximately 304M parameters, primarily due to the large ViT backbone used for spatial feature extrac-tion. This architecture also incurs substantially higher com-putational cost and inference latency. In particular, the self-attention mechanism in ViTs scales quadratically with the number of visual tokens (image patches), leading to very high FLOPs when processing high-resolution inputs. In contrast, the VideoMamba model requires considerably fewer parameters (74M) and exhibits significantly lower computational cost and latency. Its state-space temporal modeling enables efficient sequence processing while main-taining linear complexity with respect to sequence length. Overall, these results highlight the trade-off between the strong spatial representation capacity of the ViT-based ar-chitecture and the computational efficiency of the Video-Mamba model. 

Interpretability Analysis. To investigate whether the proposed model relies on semantically meaningful visual cues, we analyzed spatial attribution maps generated us-ing Layer-CAM across both training and held-out test se-quences. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the explanation maps re-veal that the model consistently attends to hand–instrument interaction regions throughout the temporal window, with activation patterns concentrated around the exchange zone where the handover occurs. Notably, this localized attention behavior is not restricted to training samples but is also ob-served on the unseen test set from a different surgery. This consistency suggests that the learned representations cap-ture transferable visual patterns associated with handover dynamics rather than overfitting to surgery-specific appear-ance characteristics. Although the current size of the dataset constrains the extent of generalization analysis, these find-ings indicate that the model is learning in a clinically mean-ingful direction and would likely benefit from continued data acquisition over time. Similarly, gradient-based attri-bution applied to the VideoMamba model (shown in Fig. 5) demonstrates that it also attends to the relevant portions of the handover sequence, with accumulated gradients high-lighting the frames and spatial regions where the instrument transfer unfolds. Together, these analyzes provide evidence that both architectures ground their predictions in visually interpretable interaction cues, supporting the validity of the learned representations for surgical handover analysis. 

# 5. Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduced an interpretable spatiotemporal vision framework for event-level analysis of surgical instrument handovers in intraoperative videos acquired during real surgical procedures. The proposed architecture combines transformer-based spatial representation learning with re-current temporal aggregation and employs a unified multi-task formulation to jointly model handover occurrence and interaction directionality. Table 2. Computational characteristics of the compared models with an input sequence length of 8. ViT–LSTM (image size of                  

> 518 ×518 , and VideoMamba-Middle ( 512 ×512 ). The total en-coding time for eight images processed by the Vision Transformer (ViT) is 232 milliseconds. However, for real-time applications, the design can be improved by implementing sequential processing and storing the ViT encodings in a queue. As a result, processing each new image would take approximately 30 milliseconds, which is appropriate for real-time performance.
> Model Params FLOPs Latency (ms) Multi-task ViT–LSTM 304.47M 3.32 ×10 12 232.61 VideoMamba-Middle 74.32M 7.25 ×10 961.12

Evaluation on real surgical recordings demonstrates that explicit task separation and recurrent temporal modeling en-able reliable handover detection despite severe occlusions, background clutter, and restricted visibility. The proposed approach achieves an event-level detection F1-score of 0.84 and a mean direction classification F1-score of 0.72 on kid-ney transplant procedures. Comparative analysis with a VideoMamba-based temporal architecture revealed comple-mentary behaviors: while both models achieve compara-ble detection performance (F1 = 0.84), VideoMamba ex-hibits lower direction classification performance (mean F1 = 0.61). These observations underscore the importance of aligning temporal modeling strategies with both dataset characteristics and task structure. Layer-CAM-based attribution analyses provided further insight into the visual mechanisms underlying model pre-dictions. The resulting explanation maps indicate that deci-sions are primarily driven by localized hand–instrument in-teraction patterns. Such interpretability is particularly valu-able in surgical applications, where understanding model behavior is essential for trust, validation, and potential clin-ical integration.    

> (a) Training Set (b) Test Set
> Figure 4. Layer-CAM explanation maps of the multi-task ViT– LSTM model illustrating the contribution of individual frames to the handover detection prediction. Frame 4a is extracted from a sequence belonging to the training set, whereas frame 4b is taken from a sequence in the test set.
> (a) Training Set (b) Test Set
> Figure 5. Visualized gradient accumulation of the VideoMamba model demonstrates its ability to recognize the significance of hands during the handover process. The gradient accumulations were collected on a per-pixel basis and subsequently summed by patch to reduce noise.

Several directions for future work emerge from this study. First, improving robustness under severe occlu-sions and viewpoint variability remains a major challenge in surgical video analysis. Future approaches may bene-fit from incorporating motion-aware representations, cross-frame correspondence modeling, or multi-view learning strategies that help mitigate partial observability in com-plex operating room environments. Second, expanding dataset scale and diversity across procedures, institutions, and surgical settings is essential for improving model gen-eralization and reducing dataset-specific bias. As larger an-notated intraoperative video collections become available, more expressive temporal modeling strategies could be ex-plored. In particular, future work may further investigate the role of temporal modeling strategies for surgical inter-action analysis. While the proposed multi-task ViT–LSTM framework demonstrates strong performance for both de-tection and direction classification, the comparison with the VideoMamba-based architecture highlights how different temporal modeling paradigms capture complementary as-pects of the interaction dynamics. The use of an LSTM for temporal aggregation in the present work reflects the lim-ited size and sparsity of currently available annotated surgi-cal video datasets, where recurrent models provide a useful sequential inductive bias and stable optimization behavior. As larger and more diverse surgical video datasets become available, longer-context temporal architectures such as state-space models or transformer-based sequence models may become increasingly effective, enabling richer long-range interaction modeling and more flexible temporal con-text integration for surgical workflow analysis. References 

[1] Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Gr´ egoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert M¨ uller, and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS one , 10 (7):e0130140, 2015. 3 [2] Jieneng Chen, Yongyi Lu, Qihang Yu, Xiangde Luo, Ehsan Adeli, Yan Wang, Le Lu, Alan L. Yuille, and Yuyin Zhou. Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical image segmentation. CoRR , abs/2102.04306, 2021. 2 [3] Keqi Chen, Lilien Schewski, Vinkle Srivastav, Jo¨ el La-vanchy, Didier Mutter, Guido Beldi, Sandra Keller, and Nicolas Padoy. When do they stop?: A first step towards automatically identifying team communication in the oper-ating room, 2025. 2 [4] Tobias Czempiel, Magdalini Paschali, Matthias Keicher, Wolfgang Simson, Hannes Feussner, Seong Tae Kim, and Nassir Navab. Tecno: Surgical phase recognition with multi-stage temporal convolutional networks. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) ,2020. 3 [5] Tobias Czempiel, Magdalini Paschali, Daniel Ostler, Seong Tae Kim, Benjamin Busam, and Nassir Navab. 

OperA: Attention-Regularized Transformers for Surgical Phase Recognition , page 604–614. Springer International Publishing, 2021. 2 [6] Karam Dawoud, Wojciech Samek, Peter Eisert, Sebastian Lapuschkin, and Sebastian Bosse. Human-centered evalu-ation of xai methods. In 2023 IEEE International Confer-ence on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , pages 912–921, 2023. 3 [7] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Syl-vain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) , 2021. 2 [8] Ines Funke, Sebastian T. Mees, J¨ org Weitz, and Stefanie Speidel. Using 3d convolutional neural networks to learn spatiotemporal features for surgical workflow analysis. In-ternational Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery , 14:1217–1225, 2019. 2 [9] Xiaojie Gao, Yueming Jin, Yonghao Long, Qi Dou, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Trans-svnet: Accurate phase recogni-tion from surgical videos via hybrid embedding aggregation transformer. CoRR , abs/2103.09712, 2021. 2 [10] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence mod-eling with selective state spaces, 2024. 3 [11] Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher R´ e. Efficiently mod-eling long sequences with structured state spaces. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2022. 3 [12] Idris Hamoud, Muhammad Abdullah Jamal, Vinkle Srivas-tav, Didier Mutter, Nicolas Padoy, and Omid Mohareri. St(or)2: Spatio-temporal object level reasoning for activity recognition in the operating room, 2023. 2 [13] Ali Hatamizadeh, Yucheng Tang, Vishwesh Nath, Dong Yang, Andriy Myronenko, Bennett Landman, Holger Roth, and Daguang Xu. UNETR: Transformers for 3d medical im-age segmentation. In Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 2022. 2 [14] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. 3 [15] Peng-Tao Jiang, Chang-Bin Zhang, Qibin Hou, Ming-Ming Cheng, and Yunchao Wei. Layercam: Exploring hierarchical class activation maps for localization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 30:5875–5888, 2021. 2, 3 [16] Yueming Jin, Qi Dou, Hao Chen, Lequan Yu, Jing Qin, Chi-Wing Fu, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Sv-rcnet: Workflow recognition from surgical videos using recurrent convolu-tional network. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , PP: 1–1, 2017. 2, 3 [17] Katerina Katsarou, Amira Mouakher, Paul Chojecki, David Przewozny, Detlef Runde, and Sebastian Bosse. Surgigard: Surgical instrument handover graph-based supervision and robust detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE 13th Interna-tional Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) , pages 452–461, 2025. 1, 3 [18] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, Mustafa Suleyman, and Andrew Zisserman. The kinetics human action video dataset, 2017. 5 [19] Dani Kiyasseh, Runzhuo Ma, Taseen F Haque, Brian J Miles, Christian Wagner, Daniel Donoho, Anima Anandkumar, and Andrew J Hung. A vision transformer for decoding surgeon activity from surgical videos. Nature Biomedical Engineer-ing , 2023. 3 [20] AM Kooijmans, L de Rouw, M van der Elst, and JJ van den Dobbelsteen. Surgical instrument counting: Current prac-tice and staff perspectives on technological support. Human Factors in Healthcare , 6:100087, 2024. 1 [21] Colin Lea, Austin Reiter, Rene Vidal, and Gregory D. Hager. Segmental spatiotemporal cnns for fine-grained action seg-mentation, 2016. 2 [22] Colin Lea, Michael D. Flynn, Ren´ e Vidal, Austin Reiter, and Gregory D. Hager. Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2017. 3 [23] Kunchang Li and et al. Videomamba: State space model for efficient video understanding. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 3, 5, 11 [24] Yang Liu, Maxence Boels, Luis C. Garcia-Peraza-Herrera, Tom Vercauteren, Prokar Dasgupta, Alejandro Granados, and S´ ebastien Ourselin. Lovit: Long video transformer for surgical phase recognition. Medical Image Analysis , 99: 103366, 2025. 3 [25] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In 

International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. 2[26] Chinedu Innocent Nwoye, Deepak Alapatt, Tong Yu, Ar-men Vardazaryan, Lena Maier-Hein, and Nicolas Padoy. Recognition of instrument-tissue interactions in endoscopic videos via action triplets. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) , 2021. 2 [27] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Theo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Rus-sell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Hu Xu, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Wojciech Galuba, Mike Rabbat, Mido Assran, Nico-las Ballas, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bo-janowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision, 2023. 11 [28] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. 3 [29] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should i trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD In-ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , page 1135–1144, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery. 3 [30] Massimo Salvi, Silvia Seoni, Andrea Campagner, Arkadiusz Gertych, U.Rajendra Acharya, Filippo Molinari, and Fed-erico Cabitza. Explainability and uncertainty: Two sides of the same coin for enhancing the interpretability of deep learning models in healthcare. International Journal of Med-ical Informatics , 197:105846, 2025. 3 [31] Wojciech Samek, Gr´ egoire Montavon, Sebastian La-puschkin, Christopher J. Anders, and Klaus-Robert M¨ uller. Explaining deep neural networks and beyond: A review of methods and applications. Proceedings of the IEEE , 109(3): 247–278, 2021. 3 [32] Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Ba-tra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 618–626, 2017. 3 [33] Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Vi´ egas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825 , 2017. 3 [34] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017. 3 [35] Andru P. Twinanda, Sherif Shehata, Didier Mutter, Jacques Marescaux, Michel de Mathelin, and Nicolas Padoy. En-donet: A deep architecture for recognition tasks on laparo-scopic videos. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 36 (1):86–97, 2017. 2, 3 [36] Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Poojan Oza, Ilker Hacihaliloglu, and Vishal M. Patel. Medical transformer: Gated axial-attention for medical image segmentation. In NeurIPS Work-shop on Medical Imaging , 2021. 2 [37] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 2 [38] Zifeng Wang, Zhenbang Wu, Dinesh Agarwal, and Jimeng Sun. MedCLIP: Contrastive learning from unpaired medical images and text. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3876–3887, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2022. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. 3 [39] Koji Yokoyama, Goshiro Yamamoto, Chang Liu, Kazumasa Kishimoto, and Tomohiro Kuroda. Operating room surveil-lance video analysis for group activity recognition. Ad-vanced Biomedical Engineering , 12:171–181, 2023. 2 [40] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and under-standing convolutional networks. In European conference on computer vision , pages 818–833. Springer, 2014. 3 [41] Bokai Zhang, Bharti Goel, Mohammad Hasan Sarhan, Varun Kejriwal Goel, Rami Abukhalil, Bindu Kalesan, Na-talie Stottler, and Svetlana Petculescu. Surgical workflow recognition with temporal convolution and transformer for action segmentation. International journal of computer as-sisted radiology and surgery , 18(4):785—794, 2023. 3 [42] Zihao Zhao, Yuxiao Liu, Han Wu, Mei Wang, Yonghao Li, Sheng Wang, Lin Teng, Disheng Liu, Zhiming Cui, Qian Wang, and Dinggang Shen. Clip in medical imaging: A sur-vey. Medical image analysis , 102:103551, 2025. 3 Event-Level Detection of Surgical Instrument Handovers in Videos with Interpretable Vision Models 

# Supplementary Material 

This document provides additional material supporting the main paper. It includes a detailed description of the training procedure, implementation details of the evaluated models, and additional qualitative results illustrating model behav-ior. These supplementary analyses complement the experi-mental results presented in the main manuscript. 

# A. Training Procedure 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the training procedure of the pro-posed framework. 

# B. Implementation Details 

This section provides details on the models used in this work. 

B.1. Multi-Task ViT-LSTM 

The Multi-Task ViT-LSTM uses a Pytorch Image Models checkpoint of a ViT-Large/14 backbone pretrained with the DINOv2 self-supervised method [27] on the LVD-142M dataset. Table 3 contains the detailed model architecture and training setup. The models are trained on a single NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU. Each epoch processes one third of the dataset. A weighted random sampler is used with fixed class sam-pling probabilities of 0.6, 0.2, and 0.2 for assistant idle ,

assistant receives , and assistant gives , respectively. The AdamW optimizer is used. Regarding the tranformations, 

JitteredCenterCrop crops a fixed-size fraction of the im-age around the centre, but randomly jitters the crop cen-tre within a specified horizontal and vertical range. More specifically, it crops 40% of the image width and 71.1% of the height around the centre, randomly shifting the crop by up to ±3% horizontally and ±5% vertically before ensuring the crop remains within the image boundaries. For testing, no shifting is applied. ColorJitter is applied with brightness 

±0.2, contrast ±0.1, saturation ±0.2, and hue ±0.05. The probability of HorizontalFlip is 0.5. 

B.2. VideoMamba 

As a comparison model, we employ a VideoMamba back-bone [23] pretrained on Kinetics-400 at 224 ×224 resolution with 8 input frames. The backbone’s classification head is replaced by a custom projection head consisting of four lin-ear layers with LayerNorm, GELU activations, and dropout (rate 0.3), mapping from the 576-dimensional CLS token to the three handover classes. 

Algorithm 1: Training on windowed surgical video 

Input: Video frames {It}Nt=1 ; sampled frames 

T =8 ; frame stride sf =4 ; sequence stride 

ss=2 ; labels y ∈ { 0, 1, 2}

Output: Trained parameters of ViT backbone fViT ,projection g, LSTM fLSTM , detection head, direction head 

foreach training iteration do 

Sample sequence start indices {ti}Bi=1 ;

// Construct temporal input sequences 

X ← { Iti+ks f }B,T −1 

> i=1 ,k =0

;

// X ∈ RB×T ×H×W ×3

Apply training augmentation to all frames in X;

// Spatial encoding (per frame) 

F ← fViT (X) ; // frame-wise ViT features // Projection to temporal embedding space 

E ← g(F ) ; // E ∈ RB×T ×D

// Temporal aggregation 

z ← fLSTM (E) ; // final hidden state z ∈ RB×H

// Predictions 

ˆpdet ← σ(Head det (z)) ;

ˆpdir ← softmax(Head dir (z)) ;

// Targets 

ydet ← 1[y̸ = 2] ;

m ← ydet ;

ydir ← y;

// Multi-task loss 

Ldet ← WBCE(ˆ pdet , y det );

Ldir ← WCE(ˆ pdir [m], y dir [m]) ;

L ← λdet Ldet + λdir Ldir ;Update parameters via backpropagation on L;We selectively fine-tune the last 12 of 24 Mamba blocks along with the final normalization layer, keeping the re-maining backbone frozen. The backbone is trained with a learning rate of 5×10 −5 and the projection head at 1×10 −4,both using AdamW with a weight decay of 5 × 10 −4 and a cosine annealing schedule with warm restarts every 10 epochs. Classification is performed for the center frame of each clip via a relaxed majority-vote labeling over a 5-frame window during training. More details are provided in Table 3. Implementation details of ViT-LSTM model. 

Quantity Value 

Image Input Size 518 x 518 Feature Projection Dimension 64 Backbone Learning Rate 3 × 10 −6

Backbone Weight Decay 1 × 10 −4

Backbone Layers Frozen 18 of 24 Backbone Ouput Dropout Rate 0.3 LSTM Learning Rate 1 × 10 −5

LSTM Weight Decay 1 × 10 −5

LSTM Hidden Size 64 LSTM Hidden Layers 1LSTM Output Dropout Rate 0.4 Batch Size 8LR Scheduler 5% Linear Warmup + Cosine Annealing Gradient Accumulation Steps 2Effective Batch Size 16 Max Gradient Norm 1.0 Loss Weighting wpos = 1 .5

λdet = 2 .5

λdir = 1 

Number of Epochs (Incl. Early Stopping) 10 Training Augmentations JitteredCenterCrop ColorJitter HorizontalFlip Test Augmentations JitteredCenterCrop 

Table 4. 

# C. Additional Figures 

Additional qualitative examples of Layer-CAM explana-tions are provided in Fig. 6 to illustrate the spatial regions contributing to handover detection. 

Table 4. Implementation details of the VideoMamba comparison model. 

Quantity Value 

Backbone Variant VideoMamba-Middle Pretraining Dataset Kinetics-400 Image Input Size 512 × 512 Number of Input Frames 8Backbone Embedding Dimension 576 Backbone Layers Frozen 12 of 24 Backbone Learning Rate 5 × 10 −5

Projection Head Learning Rate 

1 × 10 −4

Weight Decay 5 × 10 −4

Projection Head Architecture 576–256–128–128–1 Projection Head Dropout Rate 0.3 Drop Path Rate (Backbone) 0.1 LR Scheduler CosineAnnealingWarmRestarts (T0=10 )Training Label Strategy Majority vote (5-frame window) Loss Function BCEWithLogits (weighted) Training Augmentations JitteredCenterCrop ColorJitter HorizontalFlip Test Augmentations JitteredCenterCrop Frame 1 Frame 2 Frame 3 Frame 4    

> Frame 5 Frame 6 Frame 7 Frame 8

(a) Training Set Frame 1 Frame 2 Frame 3 Frame 4    

> Frame 5 Frame 6 Frame 7 Frame 8

(b) Test Set 

Figure 6. Layer-CAM explanation maps illustrating the contri-bution of each frame to the handover detection prediction. The explanation maps are generated using the second-to-last and third-to-last layers of the model.