Title: 2604.23514v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23514v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:51:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
1

## Probabilistic Graphical Model using Graph Neural Networks for 

## Bayesian Inversion of Discrete Structural Component States 

Teng Li a,b , Stephen Wu c,d , Yong Huang a,b,* , James L. Beck e, Hui Li a,b  

> a

Key Lab of Smart Prevention and Mitigation of Civil Engineering Disasters of the Ministry of 

Industry and Information Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China  

> b

Key Lab of Structures Dynamic Behavior and Control of the Ministry of Education, School of 

Civil Engineering, Harbin, Insti tute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China  

> c

The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Research Organization of Information and Systems, 10 -3

Midori -cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo 190 -8562, Japan  

> d

The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, 10 -3 Midori -cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo 

190 -8562, Japan  

> e

Division of Engineering and Applied Science, California Institute of Technology, CA, USA 

Abstract 

The health condition of components in civil infrastructures can be described by 

various discrete states according to their performance degradation. Inferring these states 

from measurable responses is typically an ill -posed inverse problem. Although 

Bayesian methods are well -su ited to tackle such problems, computing the posterior 

probability density function (PDF) presents challenges. The likelihood function cannot 

be analytically formulated due to the unclear relationship between discrete states and 

structural responses, and th e high -dimensional state parameters resulting from 

numerous components severely complicates the computation of the marginal likelihood 

function. To address these challenges, this study proposes a novel Bayesian inversion 

paradigm for discrete variables bas ed on Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs). The 

Markov networks are employed as modeling tools, with model parameters learned from 

data and structural topology prior. It has been proved that inferring this PGM produces 

the same probabilistic estimation as the posterior PDF derived from Bayesian inference, 

which effectively solves the above challenges. The inference is accomplished by Graph 

Neural Networks (GNNs), and a graph property -based GNN training strategy is 

developed to enable accurate inference acr oss varying graph scales, thereby 

significantly reducing the computational overhead in high -dimensional problems. Both 

synthetic and experimental data are used to validate the proposed framework.   

> *Corresponding author.
> E-mail address: huangyong@hit.edu.cn (Y. Huang). Tel : 86 -15326669082. 2

1.Introduction 

Civil infrastructures are complex systems co mposed of numerous interdependent 

structural components, whose operational states significantly influence the overall 

system performance. Factors such as material degradation, cumulative damage, and 

potential defects can adversely affect structural compone nts, leading to progressive 

deterioration throughout their service life. As the service performance of the structure 

decreases, its health condition can be described by different discrete states (e.g., intact 

and damaged, or more categories). This not only simplifies the representation of health 

conditions but also provides crucial support for engineering decision -making. Inferring 

such discrete states for critical components through measurable system responses is 

crucial for developing targeted maintenance strategies and ensuring structural safety 

and reliability  [1,2].

Over the last few decades, many methodologies have been developed to assess the 

health conditions of structures and their components  [3-5], such as approaches based 

on structural dynamic characteristics (e.g., natura l frequencies and mode shapes)  [6,7],

methods based on finite element model updating  [8]  and methods based on neural 

networks  [9,10 ]. Some of these technologies evaluate the structural state by comparing 

dynamic or physical parameters with established health baselines, while others identify 

the severity of structural damages by extracting features from monitoring data and 

determine the state accordingly. However, many of current researches are confined to 

deterministic frameworks, which fail to adequately account for critical influencing 

factors such as envi ronmental variability, model uncertainties, and data incompleteness. 

Essentially, inversion problems in engineering applications are ill -posed and ill -

conditioned  [1 1] , as limited and noisy observational data makes it difficult to 

deterministically identify model parameters. In this context, Bayesian method offers a 

rigorous framework for addressing such issues by incorporating prior knowledge with 

monitoring data to constrain the solution space, while effectively quantifying 

uncertainties in the estimated parameters  [12 -14 ]. The posterior probabilities obtained 

from Bayesian inference can also guide for decision -making in engineering applications 

[15] . Furthermore, Bayesian methods naturally models the correlation between model 

parameters through their probabilistic framework, which can fully account for the 

depende ncies between structural components. 

In recent years, some methods based on Bayesian framework have been proposed 

for evaluating the structural health conditions  [11 ,12 ,16 -19 ]. For example, Jia et al. 

extracted detailed information about structural creep, stiffness , and pre -stress based on 3

Bayesian inference framework to evaluate structural anomalies  [17] ; Huang et al. 

employed a hierarchical sparse Bayesian l earning method to calculate the posterior 

probability density function (PDF) of stiffness parameters and estimate the probability 

of structural damage  [13] . This type of method involves inferring the posterior PDF of 

relevant model parameters, and the formulation of likelihood function as well as the 

computation of the marginal likelihood is necessary during the inference process. In 

general, when the goal i s to infer structural physical parameters (e.g. stiffness), the 

likelihood function between structural monitoring response and parameters can be 

expressed explicitly because of the deterministic relationship defined by the structural 

dynamics equation. How ever, when the objective shifts to inferring the states of 

structural components, the variables to be inferred will change from continuous model 

parameters to discrete states. This shift significantly complicates the construction of the 

likelihood function , due to the absence of well -defined mechanical principles that 

directly relate monitoring responses to component states  [20] . In addition, civil 

structures generally comprise numerous interdependent components, which creates a 

high -dimensional parameter space that requires expensive computation to obtain the 

marginal likelihood  [12] . Meanwhile, modeling the dependencies between structural 

components can be more challenging, as the commonly used covariance has a weaker 

ability to capture complex correlation patterns between discrete state variab les 

compared to continuous model parameters. This phenomenon stems from a mismatch 

in its mathematical essence. Covariance is primarily used to measure linear and smooth 

covariation trend, while complex relationships involving discrete states are commonly 

intricate and nonlinear  [21 ,22 ]. These difficulties limit the application of Bayesian 

methods in inferring the discrete component states. 

To deal with these issues, this study proposes a novel paradigm for Bayesian 

inversion using PGMs  [23] . The strong expressive capability of this framework makes 

it suitable for addressing the aforementioned challenges. By defining local interactions 

through potential functions, the dependenc ies between component states and the 

relationship between component states and system responses can be modeled. The 

structural topology prior of the structure and the monitoring data are then used to learn 

this model. Furthermore, the posterior PDF can be estimated through PGM inference, 

which eliminates the requirement of an analytical likelihood function and avoids the 

computation of marginal likelihood. Some advantages of PGMs in engineering 

applications have been shown in existing researches, the Bayesi an network is used for 

the risk -based decision and condition assessment applications  [24 ,25 ], and the 4

undirected graphical model is employed to implement structural damage detection  [26] .

These studies demonstrate the powerful ability of PGMs, indicating that there is still 

room for exploration of in their applications. 

However, the implementation of PGM framework also presents some challenges. 

Traditional inference algorithms such as variable elimination (VE), belief propagation 

(BP)  [27]  and MCMC  [21]  are subject to various limitations. The increasing number of 

model parameters will result in a significant de crease in accuracy and efficiency for 

these algorithms. Although the information propagation mechanisms  [28 ,29 ] have been 

leveraged to develop neural network -based inference methods such as Graph Neural 

Networks (GNNs) and Message -Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs)  [30 ,31 ], one 

critical challenge in practical applications is that training GNN for inferring high -

dimensional models is computationally expensive, as both data acquisition and network 

optimization require substantial resources proportional to model size  [32] . This 

limitation has motivated the development of size generalization capabilities in GNN 

architectures – a critical innovation enabling effective know ledge transfer from simple 

models to large -scale models while maintaining inference accuracy. Recent research in 

GNN generalization has predominantly focused on in -distribution (ID) generalization 

scenarios  [33 ,34 ], where training and testing data share identical statistical distribu tions. 

However, this idealized assumption often fails to hold in real -world applications due to 

distributional shifts. While emerging studies have started to tackle more complex 

challenges such as out -of -distribution (OOD) generalization  [35 ,36 ] and size 

generalization  [37 ,38 ], the field still lacks a unified theoretical framework capable of 

rigorously characterizing the generalization boundaries of GNNs. Thus, further 

investigation in this area remains necessary. 

In this study, we present a novel paradigm of Bayesian inversion for discrete -state 

assessment of structural components based on PGMs, and the marginal posterior PDF 

of Bayesian inference is obtained by PGM inference via a GNN -based algorithm. This 

framewo rk uses Markov network to model the dependencies among discrete component 

states, with parameters learned through monitoring data and structural topology prior. 

Making inference on such model is proved to produce the same probabilistic estimation 

of compon ent state as the posterior PDF derived from Bayesian inference. This 

improvement effectively avoids the challenges of establishing an analytical likelihood 

function and computing a high -dimensional summation for marginal likelihood. 

Furthermore, this study investigates how graph properties affect the size generalization 

performance of GNNs and develops a training strategy that enables GNNs to achieve 5

accurate inference on high -dimensional problems with low computational overhead. 

For complex structural scen arios encountered in engineering applications, this approach 

ensures sufficient computational accuracy and efficiency, making it highly significant. 

Finally, both the synthetic data and experimental data are employed to validate the 

performance of the prop osed framework. 

The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section  2, we demonstrate the 

Bayesian inversion of discrete component states and its challeng es, then we illustrate 

how to use PGMs to deal with such problem. The model learning method is also 

described. Section  3 introduces the theoretical foundations of GNNs and how to use 

GNNs to implement graphical model inference. Section  4 presents some synthetic 

experiments for in vestigating GNNs' size generalization capabilities. This section 

further provides comparative analyses of computational efficiency and inference 

accuracy between GNN -based and conventional algorithms. Finally, Section  5

validates the framework on a truss structure, with the results demonstrating the 

effectiveness of the proposed method. 

2. Bayesian inversion of discrete component states based on PGMs 

2.1 Bayesian inversion of discrete component states and its challenges 

Here we use the vector 𝜽 = (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 )𝑇 to represent the state parameter 

composed of multiple structural component states, each 𝜃 𝑖 in 𝜽 is defined as a binary 

variable representing two possible states (intact and damaged). The goal of Bayesian 

inversion for discrete component states is to estimate the relative plausibility of each 

state within two discrete states based on measurable struc tural responses 𝑫 . According 

to Bayes ’ Theorem, the posterior PDF of the component states can be obtained by: 

𝑝 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) = 𝑝 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )

𝑝 (𝑫 ) = 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )𝑝 (𝜽 )

∑ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )𝑝 (𝜽 )𝜽 

∝ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )𝑝 (𝜽 ) (1)

where 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) is the likelihood function, which expresses the probability of getting 

data 𝑫 conditioned on the component state 𝜽 ; 𝑝 (𝜽 ) is the prior distribution, which 

quantifies the initial plausibility of each state defined by the value of 𝜽 ; and 𝑝 (𝑫 ) =

∑ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )𝑝 (𝜽 )𝜽 is the marginal likelihood, which is a normalizing constant. 

Computing the posterior PDF poses challenges, particularly in formulating the 

likelihood function 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) and computing the marginal likelihood 𝑝 (𝑫 ) . For the 

likelihood function 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) , if the relationship between model parameters and the 

system responses is explicitly defined (e.g., classical structural dynamics equations 6

relating the structural stiffness to acceleration responses), it can be easily obtained. 

However, in the context of inferring discrete states, there is no longer an explicit 

mathematical model to characterize the relationship between discrete states and system 

responses. As a result, constructing an analytical likelihood function becomes 

particularly challenging. For t he marginal likelihood 𝑝 (𝑫 ) , the computation is 

confronted with combinatorial explosion. Since the structure with numerous 

components typically results in a large number of discrete state parameters, the 

summation of marginal likelihood is often intractabl e, i.e., 

𝑝 (𝑫 ) = ∑ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )𝑝 (𝜽 )

> 𝜽

= ∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 )𝑝 (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 )

> 𝜃 𝑛 𝜃 1

(2)

Furthermore, if we want to know the marginal distribution of each component, the 

marginalization also needs a complicate accumulation operation: 

𝑝 (𝜃 𝑖 |𝑫 ) = ∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ ∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ 𝑝 (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 |𝑫 )

> 𝜃 𝑛 𝜃 𝑖 +1𝜃 𝑖 −1𝜃 1

= ∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ ∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ 𝑝 (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 , 𝑫 )𝜃 𝑛 𝜃 𝑖 +1𝜃 𝑖 −1𝜃 1

∑ ∙∙∙ ∑ 𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 )𝑝 (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, … , 𝜃 𝑛 )𝜃 𝑛 𝜃 1

(3)

One more challenge lies in the fact that specifying the covariance matrix in the 

prior distribution to account for the dependencies between model parameters is not 

suitable for discrete variables. Covariance intrinsically measures the average tendency 

of two variables to vary together in the same or opposite directions relative to their 

respective means. Although it can, to some extent, indica te a directional association 

between discrete variables (e.g., adjacent components are more likely to be in the same 

or similar states). However, most nominal variables are often subjectively assigned (e.g., 

component state can be encoded as 1, 2 or any nu mber.), which makes it hard to directly 

interpret the covariance values as indicators of dependency strength. Moreover, 

covariance is often suboptimal for characterizing the associations between component 

states, because adjacent component states often exh ibit a complex relationship, which 

means that when the state of one component changes, the resulting changes in its 

adjacent components cannot be described by a simple linear function. 

To overcome the challenges mentioned before, we employ PGMs to provide a

framework for modeling dependencies between component states, linking monitoring 

data to component states, and enabling efficient posterior estimation. 

2.2 Bayesian inversion by PGMs 

PGMs provide a principled framework for representing complex joint prob ability 7

distributions over multiple random variables by encoding conditional dependencies in 

a graph structure. PGMs are broadly categorized into two main types: directed graphical 

models (Bayesian networks), which represent causal or directional relations hips using 

directed acyclic graphs; and undirected graphical models (Markov Random Fields, 

MRFs), which capture symmetric, non -directional dependencies through undirected 

edges. The modeling tool we employ is the pairwise Markov network, which is a 

subclas s of Markov networks. 

Specifically, a pairwise Markov network over a graph 𝒢 (𝝂 , 𝜺 ) is parameterized 

by a set of potential functions that are defined over cliques  [21] . A clique is defined as 

a subset of nodes that are fully connected to each other, and it serves as the fundamental 

unit for defining potential functions that encode local dependencies within the 

probability distribution. To better describe the structural system ’s behavior, we define 

potential functions 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) over the clique of adjacent component states (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) ∈

𝜺 to encode the dependencies between components, and 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 ) are defined to 

represent the relationship between each component state and the data measured at the 

corresponding location. Then the joint distribution can be expressed as: 

𝑝 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = 1

𝑍 ∏ 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) ∏ 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 )

> 𝑖 ∈𝝂 (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜺

(4)

where 𝝂 = {𝜈 𝑖 |𝑖 = 1,2, … , 𝑛 } and 𝜺 = {(𝑖 , 𝑗 )|𝑖 , 𝑗 ∈ 𝝂 , 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 } represents the nodes and 

the edges in graph 𝒢 , respectively; 𝜃 𝑖 denotes the state variable at node 𝜈 𝑖 ; 𝑑 𝑖 is the 

observed data corresponding to the location of the 𝑖 th component; 𝑛 is the number of 

nodes in the graph (also called the order of the graph); 𝑍 is the partition function that 

ensures the normalization of the joint probability distribution. For simplicity, here we 

consider each component state 𝜃 𝑖 as a binary variable, w ith values of −1 or 1

representing the intact and damaged states, respectively. The number of data points is 

also assumed to be the same as components. 

The potential functions are both taken in the logarithmic form, i.e., 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) =

exp (−𝜔 𝑖𝑗 𝜃 𝑖 𝜃 𝑗 ) and 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 ) = exp (−𝑘 𝑖 𝜃 𝑖 𝑑 𝑖 ) . Then the distributions are 

represented as: 

𝑝 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = 1

𝑍 𝑒 𝐸 (𝜽 ,𝓓 ) (5)

𝐸 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = − ∑ 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 𝜃 𝑖 𝜃 𝑗 

> (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜀

− ∑ 𝑘 𝑖 𝜃 𝑖 𝑑 𝑖 

> 𝑖 ∈𝜈

(6)8

where 𝐸 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) is the energy of the system with interacting elements. This modeling 

approach is capable of expressing the energy levels of the node pair under different 

state configurations, and match their probabilities based on the principle of system 

energy minimizat ion  [21] . The parameters 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑘 𝑖 , which are to be learned, can 

also represent the dependency strength between adjacent states. 

Consider that data 𝑫 is observable, it can be regarded as a deterministic part, so 

the distribution of 𝜽 conditioned on data 𝑫 can be expressed by: 

𝑝 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) = 𝑝 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )

𝑝 (𝑫 ) =

1

𝑍 exp (− ∑ 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 𝜃 𝑖 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜀 − ∑ 𝑏 𝑖 𝜃 𝑖 𝑖 ∈𝜈 )

1

𝑍 ∑ exp (− ∑ 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 𝜃 𝑖 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜀 − ∑ 𝑏 𝑖 𝜃 𝑖 𝑖 ∈𝜈 )𝜽 

= 1

𝑍 exp (− ∑ 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 𝜃 𝑖 𝜃 𝑗 

> (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜀

− ∑ 𝑏 𝑖 𝜃 𝑖 

> 𝑖 ∈𝜈

) (7)

𝑏 𝑖 = 𝑘 𝑖 𝑑 𝑖 (8)

where 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 denotes edge potential and node potential, respectively. This model 

is also known as Ising model  [39] , which was first introduced in statistical physics to 

represent the energy of a system with interacting atoms. 

Actually, through the Markov network modeling for component states and 

structur al responses, the posterior distribution in Bayesian inference is surrogated by 

the conditional distribution in Eq. (7). We proved that the posterior distribution obtained 

by the graphical model is identical to the posterior PDF obtained through Bayesian 

inference. The details of the proof are provided in the  Appendix A. A simple proof for 

the equivalence .

Obtain ing the marginal distribution of component states requires only determining 

𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 , and then executing inference algorithms on the established model. In this 

way, there is no need to construct an analytical likelihood function, and the high -

dimensional summation is also not required. 

2.3 Learning of PGMs 

The inference of PGMs needs the determination of both model structure and model 

parameters. The structure of the model indicates on which pairs of state variables the 

potential function is defined, while the parameters 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 show how these 

adjace nt variables are related and how the monitoring data reflect the component states. 

However, the incompleteness of structural monitoring data makes it difficult for 

traditional maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) methods to effectively implement 9

PGM learni ng works. Therefore, this study adopts a heuristic approach to determine the 

model structure and uses the mutual -information -based method for parameter learning. 

2.3.1 Determination of the PGM structure 

Structural learning in PGMs seeks to discover conditi onal dependencies between 

variables through measurements, i.e., to actually identify which variables are 

interrelated. This study uses a heuristic method for structural learning that establishes 

direct correspondence between the structure of graphical mode l and structure ’s

geometry. Specifically, the structure of the graphical model is equivalent to the spatial 

configuration of the considered components. An example is shown in  Figure 1. This 

approach maintains physical consistency with structural system behavior through 

intuitive alignment, and it is also a direct utilization of structural topology prior. From 

a mechanical perspective, there are complex f orce transmission paths and interaction 

mechanisms between structural components. An alteration in the mechanical behavior 

of one component propagates to adjacent components through connections. This 

heuristic method can effectively capture direct correlat ion patterns between 

neighboring components through edge connections. 

2.3.2 Learning potential function 𝝓 𝒊 (𝜽 𝒊 , 𝒅 𝒊 )

When the relationship between the discrete model parameters 𝜽 and the 

measurement 𝑫 is complex, learning this part is quite challenging. To mitigate the 

effects of noisy raw data, the feature data which is sensitive to anomalies is employed 

(e.g., modal data). Consider that the measurement 𝑑 𝑖 is not a discrete variable, we can 

learn th e potential function 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 ) across all possible realizations of 𝜃 𝑖 to 

comprehensively account for all scenarios. According to the assumption that 𝜃 𝑖 takes 

the value of -1 and 1 for respectively representing intact state and damaged state, there 

are two scenarios to be considered. The first scenario is that the structure is intact. Since 

we generally have monitoring data for intact structures, we can use a Gaussian mixture 

model (GMM) based density estimation method to obtain 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 = −1, 𝑑 𝑖 ) . The 

probability distribution of 𝑑 𝑖 can be expressed as: 

𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 ) = ∑ 𝜋 𝑘 𝒩 (𝑑 𝑖 ; 𝜇 𝑘 , ∑𝑘 )

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

(9)

where 𝐾 is the number of Gaussian models; 𝜋 𝑘 is the weight of the 𝑘 th Gaussian 10    

> (a) (b)
> Figure 1.An example of the structure learning method. (a) a structure with sensors. (b) the probabilistic
> graphical model corresponding to (a).

distribution; and 𝜇 𝑘 and ∑𝑘 denote the mean and covariance of the Gaussian 

distribution, respectively. To determine the appropriate number of mixture components 

𝐾 , we employ the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) for model selection  [40] , which 

balances model fit and complexity to avoid overfitting. Specifically, we train multiple 

GMMs with candidate values of 𝐾 (e.g., 𝐾 = 1 to 𝐾 = 10 ), and select the model 

that minimizes the BIC value. Thi s data -driven approach ensures that the chosen 𝐾 

captures the underlying distribution without unnecessary complexity, enhancing the 

robustness of the density estimation in practical scenarios where the true distribution 

may be multimodal. Based on the Exp ectation -Maximization (EM) algorithm  [41] ,

𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 ) can be learned with the optimal 𝐾 .

The second scenario involves learning 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 = 1, 𝑑 𝑖 ) . If feature data for the 

current structure (or the identical structure) in a damaged state is available, GMM can 

still be employed for density estimation. However, in many cases, estimating this 

distribution is challenging due to the lack of damage data. Under such constraints, the 

maximum entropy principle  [42]  provides a theoretical foundation for 𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 ) to adopt 

a uniform distribution over the feature data domain. The data domain for 𝑑 𝑖 is defined 

as the plausible range of the feature data, and its boundary needs to be determined 

before obtaining the target distribution 𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 ).

Some features may have a clearly defined domain (e.g., the feature in  [43] ), in 

which case it can be directly adopted as the data domain boundary. If the domain is 

undefined, the preferr ed approach is to determine the data domain using a structural 

finite element model or numerical simulations. By simulating different damage 

scenarios to generate response data under damaged conditions, the reasonable variation 11 

range of feature data 𝑑 𝑖 can be statistically derived. In addition, if the current 

conditions are not sufficient to support the calculation of the physical model, it is 

recommended to use a data -driven approach based on the statistics of the intact -state 

data. Specifically, a set o f measurements of intact -state structure can be used to 

calculate their mean 𝜇 and standard deviation 𝜎 , and then the data domain can be 

defined as [𝜇 − 3𝜎 , 𝜇 + 3𝜎 ], which follows the empirical "3 -sigma rule" to cover the 

vast majority of potential changes. This range can be further adjusted if more 

information is known. Furthermore, expert knowledge and empirical understanding of 

structural dynamics can also be used for informing the choice of the distribution. 

After obtaining the distribution of 𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 ), the parameters 𝑏 𝑖 can be estimated by: 

{𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 ) = 𝑃 𝑢 𝑖 = exp (−𝑏 𝑖 + 𝑐 𝑖 )

𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =1,𝑑 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 ) = 𝑃 𝑑 𝑖 = exp (𝑏 𝑖 + 𝑐 𝑖 ) (10 )

𝑏 𝑖 = 1

2 (𝑙𝑛 (𝑃 𝑑 ) − 𝑙𝑛 (𝑃 𝑢 )) (11 )

where 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 and 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =1,𝑑 𝑖 denote the PDF of data given different component state; 

𝑑 𝑖 represents the mean value of feature data in repeat tests ; 𝑃 𝑢 𝑖 and 𝑃 𝑑 𝑖 denote the 

probability density of 𝑑 𝑖 in different distributions; and 𝑐 𝑖 is a constant that does not 

affect the results. 

2.3.3 Learning potential function 𝝍 𝒊𝒋 (𝜽 𝒊 , 𝜽 𝒋 )

The estimation of 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) is an intractable problem due to the unavailability 

of data in numerous SHM scenarios  [21] . As an alternative, we use mutual information 

to approximately learn this parameter  [26] . According to the definitions in Section  2.2 ,

the structural component state variables 𝜃 𝑖 take the values of -1 and 1 for representing 

an intact state and a damaged state, respectively. An example for a simple case is given 

below that can be generalized to complex models. Considering a pairwise Markov 

network with two nodes 𝜈 1 and 𝜈 2, the potential function is expressed as: 

𝜓 12 (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2) = exp (−𝜔 12 𝜃 1𝜃 2) (12 )

where the binary variables 𝜃 1 and 𝜃 2 are specified with the value of −1 or 1, so we 

can derive that 

𝜓 12 (𝜃 1 = 1, 𝜃 2 = 1) = 𝜓 12 (𝜃 1 = −1, 𝜃 2 = −1) = 𝑒 −𝜔 12 (13 )

𝜓 12 (𝜃 1 = −1, 𝜃 2 = 1) = 𝜓 12 (𝜃 1 = 1, 𝜃 2 = −1) = 𝑒 𝜔 12 (14 )

This implies that the probability of a node having the same state as its neighbor is: 12 

𝑒 −𝜔 12 

(𝑒 −𝜔 12 + 𝑒 𝜔 12 ) = 1

(1 + 𝑒 2𝜔 12 ) (15 )

By generalizing this to graphical models with more than two nodes, the potential 

functions can be represented as: 

𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) = {1 − 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑓 𝜃 𝑖 ≠ 𝜃 𝑗 

𝑝 𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑓 𝜃 𝑖 = 𝜃 𝑗 

, 0 ≤ 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 ≤ 1 (16 )

where 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 denotes the probability that structural states at adjacent two nodes are t he 

same. With such a potential function, the state at one node can be reflected in its 

neighboring nodes. Due to the fact that the state of each component can be reflected by 

the response monitored at the corresponding location, it is appropriate to estima te 

parameter 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 based on the similarity in the distribution of adjacent monitoring data. 

The mutual information is used to quantify data similarity between nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗 .

Specifically, we define 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 ) as the PDF of data measured at node 𝑖 . The 

similarity modeling function is defined as: 

𝑠 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) = ( 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =𝜃 𝑗 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑗 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 )

𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 )𝑝 𝜃 𝑗 =−1,𝑑 𝑗 (𝑑 𝑗 )) (17 )

where 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =𝜃 𝑗 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑗 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) represents the joint probability distribution of 

measurements with two neighboring nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗 both intact. The distributions 

𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 ) and 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =𝜃 𝑗 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑗 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) can be determined by the methods illustrated in 

the last part. By sampling from the distribution of 𝑝 𝜃 𝑖 =𝜃 𝑗 =−1,𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑑 𝑗 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ), the mutual 

informa tion between 𝑖 and 𝑗 is estimated by: 

𝐼 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) ≈ 1

𝑁 ∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝑠 (𝑑 𝑖 

> 𝑘

, 𝑑 𝑗 

> 𝑘

))

> 𝑁
> 𝑘 =1

(18 )

where 𝑁 denotes the number of samples and 𝑑 𝑖  

> 𝑘

is the 𝑘 th sample. For a more 

convenient calculation, the normalized mutual information is used, which is defined as: 

𝑁 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) = 𝐼 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 )

√𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 )𝑖 (𝑑 𝑗 )

(19 )

where 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 ) = − 1 

> 𝑁

(∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝑝 (𝑑 𝑖 

> 𝑘

))𝑁  

> 𝑘 =1

). The normalized mutual information directly 

quantifies dependency between neighboring nodes. Consider the extreme case that node 

𝑖 and its neighbor node 𝑗 are completely dependent on each other, the state of one 

node can be determined by the other. In this case, 𝑁 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) is identified as 1 and the 13 

probability denoted by 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 takes the value of 1 at the same time. Another extreme case 

is that 𝑖 and 𝑗 are independent, and it is obvious that 𝑠 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) = 1 . Due to the 

properties of the logarithmic function, the value of 𝑁 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 ) is zero, which means that 

the state of one node cannot provide any information about its neighbor node. In other 

words, even if the state of a node has been determined, the probability of each state 

occurring in its neighboring nodes is the same, i.e. 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 = 0.5. In general situations, the 

structure lies between two extreme cases and the probability of regular cases can be 

estim ated by linear interpolation: 

𝑝 𝑖𝑗 = 0.5(1 + 𝑁 (𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑗 )) (20 )

Once the parameters 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 are learned , 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 could be estimated by the following 

equations: 

{𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 = 1, 𝜃 𝑗 = 1) = 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 = −1, 𝜃 𝑗 = −1) = 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 = exp (−𝜔 𝑖𝑗 + 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 )

𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 = 1, 𝜃 𝑗 = −1) = 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 = −1, 𝜃 𝑗 = 1) = 1 − 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 = exp (𝜔 𝑖𝑗 + 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 ) (21 )

𝜔 𝑖𝑗 = 1

2 (𝑙𝑛 (1 − 𝑝 𝑖𝑗 ) − 𝑙𝑛 (𝑝 𝑖𝑗 )) (22 )

where 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 is a constant that does not affect the results. 

To summarize, the proposed method is implemented through the following steps. 

(1) Obtaining the monitoring data sets from sensors on the structure. 

(2) Computing the parameters 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 by using Eq.( 9) ~ Eq.( 22 ). During this 

phase, prior structural knowledge may be incorporated when available. 

(3) Feeding these parameters into GNNs (The details are shown in the next 

section), and the final inference results will be output. 

3. Size -generalizable GNN for PGM inference 

A straightforward algorithm to make inference of PGMs is variable elimination, 

which substitutes all possible values of the non -target variables into the joint 

distribution and sums them up. Howe ver, this approach is NP -hard and it is difficult to 

implement when the graphical models are large (i.e., multiple components problem 

with high -dimensional parameters)  [21] . Approximate inference algorithms, such as 

belief propagation (BP) and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), often prove more 

practical than exact solutions for general implementations. BP has the ability to achieve 

accurate results in acyclic graphs. However, it performs poorly in graphs containing 

cycles, as information propagation becomes non -terminating  [27] . MCMC excels in 14 

exact inference, but its co mputational efficiency significantly decreases as the graph 

scale increases (e.g., the dimension of parameters increases).  Appendix B. General 

algorithms for PGMs inference  provides a detailed introduction to the VE, BP, and 

MCMC algorithms. In this study, a GNN -based inference algorithm is employed to deal 

with both problems, as we illustrate in the following section. 

3.1 GNN architecture for PGM inference 

Graph neural networks  [30]  (GNNs) were developed to process graph -structured 

data characterized by complex interdependencies. GNN architectures comp rise nodes 

and edges, where each element carries a vector representation encoding its hidden state. 

These hidden states undergo iterative updates through nonlinear transformations that 

integrate information from the node itself, its adjacent neighbors, and features of 

connecting edges. Once the hidden states converge or the iteration runs to the specified 

step, another non -linear function will decode the updated hidden state and outputs the 

results. In general, the functions are performed by neural networks . Their parameters 

are shared to ensure that the pattern of information aggregation is consistent throughout 

the entire graph. 

A critical challenge in applying GNNs to graphical model inference is designing a 

mapping scheme between graphical model and GNN. In other words, it is about how to 

design inputs, outputs, and network operations to adapt for inference tasks. Consider 

that graphical model parameters 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 critically determine inference outcomes, 

they serve as natural input candidates. In ad dition, the vector -valued hidden state 

defined at each node is considered as key content during the operation, as it may encode 

the critical probabilistic information for inference. The GNNs ultimately produce a 

vector output approximating the target margi nal distribution. The design of GNN in this 

study is based on the process of BP algorithm, i.e., the core concept is to propagate 

information between adjacent nodes. Formally, assume that each node is assigned with 

a P -dimensional vector ℎ𝑖  

> 𝑡

which denote s the hidden state of the node 𝑖 at step 𝑡 .

Similar to the process of BP, the message passed from node 𝑖 to node 𝑗 is defined as: 

𝑚 𝑖 →𝑗  

> 𝑡 +1

= 𝐹 (ℎ𝑖 

> 𝑡

, ℎ𝑗 

> 𝑡

, 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 , 𝑏 𝑖 , 𝑏 𝑗 ) (23 )

where 𝐹 is the deep neural network whose parameters are shared; and 𝑚 𝑖 →𝑗  

> 𝑡 +1

is a Q -

dimensional vector. The information received at each node can be aggregated as: 

𝑚 𝑖  

> 𝑡 +1

= ∑ 𝑚 𝑗 →𝑖 

> 𝑡 +1
> 𝑗 ∈𝑁 (𝑖 )

(24 )15           

> Figure 2.The process of making inference on graphical models by GNNs. This figure shows the process
> of updating the hidden state at node 𝑗 . The messages coming from adjacent nodes 𝑖 and 𝑘 are encoded
> by the deep neural networks. Then these messages are aggregat ed at node 𝑗 and the hidden state at time
> tis updated by GRUs. At the end of the iteration, the updated hidden state is decoded by another neural
> network and outputs the target distribution.

where 𝑁 (𝑖 ) denotes all the neighboring nodes of 𝑖 .

Next, the hidden state of each node is updated based on the latest information, and 

this process is implemented by the Gated Recurrent Units  [44]  (GRUs): 

ℎ𝑖  

> 𝑡 +1

= 𝐺 (ℎ𝑖 

> 𝑡

, 𝑚 𝑖 

> 𝑡 +1

) (25 )

where 𝐺 represents the recurrent neural network with GRUs. When the iteration 

reaches the specified step 𝑇 , another function decodes the updated hidden states and 

outputs the target distribution 𝑝 ̂ :

𝑝 ̂ = 𝑅 (ℎ𝑖 

> 𝑇

) (26 )

where 𝑅 is the deep neural networks; 𝑝 ̂ denotes the estimated marginal probabilities. 

Figure 2 shows the entire process of using GNNs for graphical model inference. 

3.2 Size generalization of GNNs 

GNNs require rigorous training schemes to achieve accurate probabilistic 

inference. Training labels typically require exact inference algorithm (such as VE) for 

accuracy, but the computational complexity of such algorithm grows exponentially with 

the increase of model parameter dimensions. As a result, obtaining a well -trained model 

consumes substantial time and computational resources in practical applic ations  [25] .16 

Many problems could be addressed efficiently if GNNs can learn the intrinsic properties 

of inference on small -scale graphical models a nd then successfully apply it to large -

scale graphs. However, there is currently no universal theoretical framework in the field 

of GNN size generalization to guide the training of GNNs. Notably, within the domain 

of in -distribution generalization for MPNN s, theoretical frameworks for generalization 

boundary analysis have been established under varying assumptions and architectures 

[45] . While these investigations d o not provide direct methodological instructions for 

network training, their analytical frameworks systematically identify critical factors 

influencing the generalization capacity of MPNNs. This foundation enables exploration 

of network training strategies which enhance MPNNs' size generalization capabilities. 

For example, the Rademacher complexity analysis of MPNNs for in -distribution 

generalization can be formulated through layer -wise decomposition of hypothesis space 

complexity. Let ℛ̂ (𝒯 𝛾 ) denotes the empirical Rademacher complexity of the 

hypothesis class 𝒯 𝛾 , if the maximum degree for any node is at most 𝑑 ̃ , the empirical 

Rademacher complexity ℛ̂ (𝒯 𝛾 ) is bounded by: 

ℛ̂ (𝒯 𝛾 ) ≤ 4

𝛾𝑁 + 24 𝑑 ℬ𝛽 𝑍 

𝛾 √𝑁 √3 log 𝑄 (27 )

𝑄 : = 24 𝐵 𝛽 √𝑁 max {𝑍 , ℳ√𝑑 max {ℬℎℬ1, 𝑅 ℬ2}} (28 )

where 𝑁 denotes the number of training samples; 𝑑 is the dimension of node feature 

space. The details of this theory can be found in  [45] .

In graph theory, the degree of a node is defined as the number of edges incident to 

this node, and an 𝑛 -order graph represents a graph with 𝑛 vertices. Considering that 

the degree, order, and number of training samples can have an impact on the 

generalization boundary of GNNs, in this work, several properties of the graph (average 

unique node degree, graph order, and the number of training samples) are studied to 

inform how to effectively t rain the GNNs and generalize them to make accurate and 

efficient inference on larger graphical models. The average unique node degree in a 

graph is defined as the average value of the unique node degrees, where ‘unique ’

represents that the same degree in t he graph is only counted once. The analysis of these 

graph properties on the size generalization performance of GNNs is elaborated in the 

next section. More details about the training of GNNs are also provided in Section  4.17 

4. Synthetic data study 

In practical engineering applications, graphical models for engineering structures 

are often high -dimensional, as most of the structures are typically composed of multip le 

components. Training GNNs on models with the same size leads to a high cost in label 

acquisition. In order to solve this problem, we intend to train the GNNs on small 

graphical models and generalize them to larger ones. This section discusses how severa l

graph properties affect the size generalization performance of GNNs in the context of 

PGM inference, and summarizes how to apply them to make inferences on large 

graphical models, thereby handling the computation challenge in high -dimensional 

problems. 

4.1 Parameter settings of GNN training 

The basic settings of training the GNNs are introduced as follows. The parameters 

of training graphs are sampled from different Gaussian distributions, where 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 =

𝜔 𝑖𝑗 ~𝒩 (0,1) and 𝑏 𝑖 = 𝑏 𝑖 ~𝒩 (0, 0.25 2) . Hidden vectors and message vectors in 

GNNs are set to 5 -dimensional vectors, while the output layer produces a 2 -dimensional 

vector indicating probabilities of two different states. The hidden state vectors are 

iterated 10 times before being output, i.e. , T=10 in Eq.  26 . The activation function in 

the neural network 𝐹 is specified by a rectified linear unit (ReLU), while sigmoid 

function σ(𝑥 ) = 1/(1 + exp (−𝑥 )) is taken as the activation function for the output 

network 𝑅 . In addition, both networks have two hidden layers and each layer contains 

64 units. GNNs are trained via supervised learning, optimized by minimizing the cross -

entropy loss: 

𝐿 (𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑖 ̂ ) = − ∑ 𝑝 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑖 )

> 𝑖

𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝 𝑖 ̂ (𝑥 𝑖 ) (29 )

where 𝑝 𝑖 is the real probabilities and 𝑝 𝑖 ̂ is the estimated probabilities. The GNNs are 

trained using the ADAM optimizer  [46] . The learning rate and training epochs are set 

to 0.001 and 100, respectively. 

4.2 The effects of graph properties on GNN size generalization performance 

To analyze how graph properties affec t size generalization performance, we 

trained multiple GNN models using graphs with varying graph properties. Our dataset 18 

includes graphs with orders ranging from 4 to 100 and average unique node degrees 

ranging from 2 to 9 (the properties of graphs with f ewer than 3 nodes are basically the 

same, so we did not include them in the dataset). Some instances of the training and 

testing graphs are shown in  Figure 3. We used Kullback -Leibler (K -L) divergence 

between predicted distribution and ground truth as the accuracy metric, where lower 

values correspond to higher estimation accuracy. The performances of three algorithms 

(GNN, BP and MCMC) are also compared .

4.2.1 Training set size 

Firstly, we attempted to determine the optimal training set size by observing the 

inference performance under different graph orders and degrees. The results are shown 

in  Figure 4. It can be seen that when the average unique node degree is fixed, even if 

the graph order changes, the training samples required to achieve good performance of 

GNN do not change significantl y (all around 1000). Instead, when the graph order is 

fixed, as the average unique node degree increases, the number of training samples 

required to achieve better results will also increase accordingly. 

4.2.2 Average unique node degree 

The next experiment is implemented to investigate the impact of the average 

unique node degree of the training graphs on the size generalization performance of 

GNNs. We trained several GNN models on graphical models with average unique node 

degree from 2 to 9, and the number of training samples for each degree scope depends 

on the results in  Figure 4. The testing results of the degree experiment are shown in 

Figure 5. The horizontal and vertical axes in the figure represent the average unique 

node degree of the training and testing sets, respectively. Color intensity in the figure 

corresponds to K -L divergence values, with darker hues indicating lower divergence 

(i.e., higher accuracy). The subfigure (a) demonstrates the inference performance of the 

GNNs on graph order -invariant graphical models (the graph order of the t raining and 

testing sets is fixed at 10), and (b), (c), and (d) shows the inference performance of the 

GNNs on larger graphical models (16, 36 and 100, respectively). It can be seen in this 

figure that GNNs achieve better performance on test graphical mode ls when the average 

node degree is similar to that of the training set. When training and testing graphs share 

identical orders, the performance improvement becomes prominent. As the graph order 

in the testing set increases, even though there is some degra dation, it can still be seen 

that this rule is satisfied. 19 

Figure 3. Some instances of the training and testing sets. Our dataset includes graphs with node counts 

ranging from 4 to 100, with an average unique node degree spanning from 2 to 9. The connections 

between nodes are randomly generated, and the number of connectio ns depends on the pre -set average 

unique node degree. (Note that when the average unique node degree is k, a graph that can meet the 

requirements must have at least k+ 1 nodes). 

Figure 4. The experiment on finding the optimal trai ning set size. The subfigure (a) shows the case where 

the average unique node degree is fixed at 2~3, and the graph order of the training graphs ranges from 4 

to 10. The subfigure (b) shows the case where the graph order of the training graphs is fixed at 10, and 

the average unique node degree ranges from 2 to 9. 

Consequently, it can be concluded from the experiment results that the average 

unique node degree is a major factor affecting the size generalization performance of 

GNNs, i.e., when the average uni que node degree of the graphs used for training is the 

same or close to that of the target graphical model, inference tasks on larger graphical 

models can be more accurately implemented. In the context of structural health 

monitoring applications, based on the structure learning method in this paper, the graph 

properties of graphical models established for common structures are often partly 

similar. The average unique node degree of these graphical models often falls within a 20 

suitable range, as the adjacent nodes connected to each node of the structure are usually 

not too many (to save materials and reduce weight) nor too few (to ensure stability and 

safety). For example, the graphical model (shown in  Figure 6) corresponding to the 

IASC -ASCE benchmark model  [47]  has the unique degree from 4 to 7, and its average 

unique node degree ranges from 5 to 6. Similarly, for common civil engineering 

structures, if the structure learning method described in this article is used to establish 

the graphical structure, the average unique node degree usually does not deviate 

significantly from the graph structure in the example. This facilitates GNN training by 

enabling efficient model configuration based on graph properties. 

4.2.3 Graph order in the training set 

To explore the practicality of our method, we implemented another experiment to 

investigate the size generalization performance of GNNs at the specific average unique 

node degree. The results are shown in  Figure 7. On the basis of the experiment results 

in the previous section, we tested the size generalization ability of GNNs while making 

sure that the average unique node degree of the training and testing sets was the same. 

The subfigure (a) shows the inference performance of the GNN on seen graphs. The 

comparison of GNNs with traditional algorithms BP as well as MCMC is also displayed 

in (a). Subfigures (b), (c), and (d) illustrate size generalization cases with average 

unique node degrees of 2 -3, 3-4, and 5 -6, respectively. Obviously, as the graph order in 

the training set increases, the inference accuracy on unseen large graphical models 

becomes higher. Therefore, by determining the various properties of the target graphical 

model to be inferred, one can choose a GNN training method that can ensure 

computational accuracy while spending less computational resources. In order to 

display the performance of inference more intuitively,  Figure 8 shows a scatter plot of 

the inference results when the average unique node degree is fixed at 2 -3 and the 

training graph order is fixed at 9. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the true 

results and GNN predicted results, respectively. Proximity of data points to the diagonal 

line indicates prediction accuracy. Combined with the results in  Figure 7, it can be 

concluded that when the K -L divergence is less than 0.15, the inference is relatively 

accurate. The inference performance of GNNs is also compared with algorithms (BP 

and MCMC) in  Figure 8, and four metrics  [15] , including the coefficient of 

determination (R2), mean absolute error (MAE), mean squared error (MSE) and root 

mean squared error (RMSE), are provided to quantitatively assess the performance of 

three algorithms. The results in  Table 1 indicate that under almost all conditions, GNN 21 

performs better than BP and MCMC. 

To leverage the size gen eralization capacity of GNNs in engineering applications, 

the following steps are recommended: First, establish a graphical model representation 

of the target structure. Then, design a GNN training strategy by analyzing the structural 

properties of the tar get graph structure. Subsequently, the graphical models used for 

GNN training need to be selected. When the training graphs and the target graph 

structure have identical average unique node degrees, the minimum training graph order 

which satisfies the pred efined inference accuracy should be selected. This methodology 

can achieve computational efficiency optimization without compromising prediction 

reliability. Additionally, it is worth noting that if the graph to be inferred is too large, 

increasing hyper -parameters such as T in Eq. 26  is also an effective approach. This 

action can expand the message propagation range and effectively improve accuracy, 

though at the expense of ad ditional computational cost.   

> Figure 5.The experiment results for the analysis of the influence of average unique node degree on size
> generalization performance. The graph order of the graphical models in (a), (b), (c) and (d) used to test
> the GNNs performance is set to 10, 16, 36 and 100, res pectively. The horizontal and vertical axes
> represent the average unique node degree of the training and testing sets, respectively. The colors in the
> figure represent their K -L divergence values, with smaller values indicating higher inference accuracy. 22

Figure 6. The structure of the IASC -ASCE benchmark (a) and its corresponding graphical model (b). 

Figure 7. The experiment to investigate the size generalization performance of GNNs at the specific 

avera ge unique node degree. The horizontal axis represents the graph order of the graphical models used 

to train the GNNs. The vertical axis represents K -L divergence as usual. 23 

Figure 8. The scatter plot of the inference results in the size generalization experiment. The average 

unique node degree is fixed at 2~3, and the training graph order is set to 9. The horizontal and vertical 

axes represent the true results and predicted results, r espectively. The closer the points in the graph are 

to the diagonal line, the more accurate the results are. The performance of three algorithms are compared.                                                                             

> Metric R2MAE MSE RMSE
> Algorithm BPMCMC GNN BPMCMC GNN BPMCMC GNN BPMCMC GNN
> N
> 90.8022 0.8235 0.9349 0.0645 0.0635 0.0376 0.0074 0.0066 0.0024 0.0862 0.0815 0.0495
> 160.1365 0.8026 0.8776 0.1575 0.0772 0.0625 0.0458 0.0105 0.0065 0.2140 0.1023 0.0806
> 36-0.4361 0.6204 0.6605 0.2491 0.1174 0.1234 0.1089 0.0288 0.0257 0.3300 0.1696 0.1604
> 64-0.5334 0.2531 0.3798 0.2793 0.1567 0.1885 0.1482 0.0722 0.0599 0.3850 0.2687 0.2448
> 100 -0.3848 -0.4055 0.2693 0.2819 0.2581 0.2412 0.1694 0.1720 0.0894 0.4116 0.4147 0.2990

Table 1. Comparison of quantitative metrics for inference accuracy of three algorithms. The average 

unique node degree of training and testing graphs is fixed at 2~3, and the training graph order is set to 9. 

4.2.4 Inference efficiency comparisons 

A comparative assessment of computational time expenditu res across three 

algorithms was conducted in  Figure 9. The GNN architecture demonstrated 

significantly enhanced computational efficiency compared to co nventional methods, 

particularly when performing inference operations on large -scale graph structures. 

Notably, variations in average unique node degree exerted measurable influence solely 

on BP algorithm performance – an observation aligning with fundamen tal algorithmic 

mechanisms. This difference in sensitivity highlights GNNs ’ structural scalability 

advantages in complex network analysis tasks. 24    

> Figure 9.Comparison of computational efficiency among three algorithms. The subfigu re (a) shows the
> trend of computation time as the graph order increases and the subfigure (b) shows the trend of
> computation time as the average unique node degree increases.

5. Experiments: inferring discrete states of a synthetic truss structure 

In this part, we validate the proposed method based on some experiments on a 

truss bridge, which consists of 160 bars with annular cross -sections. The longitudinal 

length of this structure is 5.5118m, with 14 bars of 0.3937m each. The transverse length 

is also 0.3 937m, while the vertical height is 0.40m. All elements share identical annular 

cross -sections with outer and inner diameters of 0.01554 m and 0.01087 m, respectively. 

The materials used to construct the structure have a Young ’s modulus of 18.5GPa and 

a she ar modulus of 79.3GPa, while the density is 8000kg/m3. The image of the 

synthetic truss structure, its member layout, the cross -section of the components, and 

their sizes are shown in  Figure 10 . Three -dimensional band -limited white noise 

excitations are applied at all joint locations on the structure, with vertical excitation 

being dominant. 

Our experiment consists of one case that the structure is intact and four cases with 

different damages. Each damage case is simulated by a different stiffness loss at a 

different bar of the truss structure.  The dataset used for validation was obtained from 

vibration videos capturing the structure's vibration in both its intact and damaged states. 

Figure 11  shows two example frames from these videos.  The displacements of the joints 

in the front row of the truss are extracted from the videos. The pixel at each joint is 

considered as a pseudo -sensor, and the structure of the graphical models is learned as 

shown in  Figure 12 . The specific damage location and corresponding stiffness reduction 

for each case are as follows: In Case 1, the element connecting nodes 3 and 4 

experienced a stiffness loss of 52. 7 %; in Case 2, the element between nodes 4 and 12 

had a stiffness reduction of 52.7 %; in Case 3, the element linking nodes 6 and 7 25         

> (a)
> (b) (c)
> Figure 10 .An overview of the synthetic truss structure. (a) The main structure. (b) The layout of the
> structure. (c) The cross section.
> (a) (b)
> Figure 11 .Two example frames of vibration videos. (a) intact state. (b) damaged state
> Figure 12 .The undirected graphical model constructed for the truss structure based on the proposed
> structural learning method.

suffered a stiffness loss of 72.5 %; and in Case 4, the element connecting nodes 2 and 10 

was subjected to a stiffness reduction of 72.5 %.  In order to avoid the impact from 

external loads, we use the fundamental mode of structural vibration to infer the 

component state. Some instances of this mode are given in  Figure 13 . In every four -

minute vibration video, we extracted 1200 displacement datasets and derived 300 

modal sets, and they are then used to estimate the node potentials and edge potentials 

by GMM an d normalized mutual information, respectively. 

To make accurate inference on the target graphical models, we trained a GNN with 

strong size generalization performance based on the analysis in the last section. 2000 

graphical models with a graph order of 10 were used to train the GNNs, and the average 

unique node degree of the training graphs is the same as the target graphical model. Six 

algorithms, including VE, BP, tree -reweighted BP (TRBP)  [48] , MCMC, variational 26   

> (a)
> (b)
> Figure 13 .Instances of the fundamental structural mode. Each structural mode is calculated based on
> measurements from different cases. (a) intact case. (b) damaged case 2.

inference (VI)  [21]  and GNN are used to infer the component states. VE provides the 

real probability of damage under the proposed framework, and other methods are all 

approximate algorithms. Structural components are classified as damaged when their 

probability exceeds a thr eshold of 0.5. The specific damage location of each case as 

well as the inferring results are shown in  Figure 14 .

In order to quantify and compare the  performance of each algorithm in inferring 

the state of components, we have provided four metrics, including the false positive 

rate (FPR), F1 score  [15] , accuracy  and runtime. Here, we use the state of the truss 

joints as a basis to indirectly determine the state of these bars. Specifically, we define a 

node set named “damaged set”, the nodes in this set include the two joints at the ends 

of the damaged bar. A fals e positive is made if any node classified as damaged falls 

outside the “damaged set”, and a false negative is made if the nodes at the ends of the 

damaged bar are missed in the “damaged set”. The true positives and true negatives are 

also defined in a simi lar way. Subsequently, F1 score and accuracy can be computed, 

and FPR can be calculated by the following equation: 

FPR = |𝐿 ∩ 𝐿 𝑐 |

|𝐿 𝑐 | (30 )

where 𝐿 denotes the set of nodes that are classified as damaged; 𝐿 𝑐 represents the set 

of all nodes except the two nodes at the end of the damaged bar; |∙| is a function for 

counting the cardinality of a set.  The results of four quantitative metrics across different 

scenarios are shown in  Table 2.27 

(a) 

(b) 28 

(c) 

(d )29 

Figure 14 . The inference results of 4 damage cases. The performance of six algorithms are compared, 

including VE (exact algorithm, others are approximate algorithms), BP, TRBP, MCMC, VI, and 

GNN. The vertical axis represents the probability of damage at each node, and the red, green, light 

green represents false positive, true positive and actual damage, respectively. (a) D amage case 1, 

damage occurs at the edge connecting 3 and 4. (b) Damage case 2, damage occurs at the edge 

connecting 4 and 12. (c) Damage case 3, damage occurs at the edge connecting 6 and 7. (d) Damage 

case 4, damage occurs at the edge connecting 2 and 10.                                                                                                                 

> Case 1 Case 2
> FPR F1 score accuracy runtime(s) FPR F1 score accuracy runtime(s)
> VE0.0714 0.8 0.9375 0.3469 0110.3466
> BP0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.0288 0.4286 0.4 0.625 0.0292
> TRBP 0.2142 0.5714 0.8125 0.0959 0.3571 0.4444 0.6875 0.0986
> MCMC 0.3571 0.4444 0.6875 0.1126 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.1140
> VI 0.2142 0.5714 0.8125 0.0147 0.0714 0.8 0.9375 0.0142
> GNN 0.2142 0.5714 0.8125 0.0045 0.0714 0.8 0.9375 0.0046
> Case 3 Case 4
> FPR F1 score accuracy runtime(s) FPR F1 score accuracy runtime(s)
> VE0.0714 0.8 0.9375 0.3394 0110.3520
> BP0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.0285 0.1429 0.6667 0.875 0.0292
> TRBP 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.0928 0.1429 0.6667 0.875 0.0984
> MCMC 0.2142 0.5714 0.8125 0.1098 0.1429 0.6667 0.875 0.1144
> VI 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.0143 0.1429 0.6667 0.875 0.0149
> GNN 0.2142 0.5714 0.8125 0.0044 0.0714 0.8 0.9375 0.0045

Mean value  VE BP TRBP  MCMC  VI  GNN  

> FPR

0.0357  0.2857  0.25  0.25  0.1786  0.1429  

> F1 score

0.9  0.5167  0.5456  0.5456  0.6523  0.6857  

> accuracy

0.9688  0.75  0.7813  0.7813  0.8438  0.875 

runtime (s)  0.3462  0.0289  0.0964  0.1127  0.0145  0.0045 

Table 2. Four quantitative metrics of inference results in  Figure 14 .

These results indicate that GNN has lower FPR, higher F1 score and higher 

accuracy than other approximate algorithms under these cases. Furthermore, GNN 

spends the least time in inferring th e graphical models, which shows its significant 

computational efficiency.  In summary, the GNN -based method demonstrates superior 

inference accuracy and computational efficiency compared to other approximate 

algorithms. We have also provided some experiments in  Appendix C. Extended 

experiments  to further investigate how the dependencies and special damage scenarios 

affect the inference results. These experiments can provide a more comprehensive 

evaluation of the methods proposed in this study 30 

6. Conclusion 

This wo rk proposes a Bayesian inversion method for discrete structural component 

states based on PGMs. In contrast to general Bayesian inversion frameworks for 

continuous parameter variables, this work infers discrete state variables, and leverages 

PGMs to addres s the accompanying challenges. By factorizing the joint distribution as 

a product of potential functions, PGMs can systematically encode the dependencies 

between structural component states, and the relationships between component state 

and data. This new paradigm also allows for efficient posterior estimation using a GNN -

based algorithm without the need to establish an analytical likelihood function and 

calculate the complicate integration of the marginal likelihood. Furthermore, to better 

apply this frame work to high -dimensional problems, we systematically investigated the 

influence of graph properties on GNNs' size generalization capabilities to develop the 

training strategies that optimize model transferability across varying graph sizes. Our 

synthetic e xperiments demonstrated that the average unique node degree and graph 

order significantly influence the generalization performance of the GNNs. By aligning 

the properties of training graphs and target graphs, the framework achieves robust 

inference accurac y on large -scale models with minimal computational overhead. 

Comparative analyses revealed that GNNs consistently outperform BP and MCMC in 

both computational efficiency and accuracy. The case studies on truss structures further 

validated the framework ’s p ractical efficacy, and the results indicate that GNNs can 

achieve better performance than other approximate algorithms in inferring the structural 

component states. 

The proposed method offers a promising pathway for real -world state inversion of 

structural components, where incomplete datasets and high -dimensional structural 

models pose persistent challenges. By combining domain knowledge encoded in PGMs 

with the scalability of GNNs, this framework bridges the gap between probabilistic 

reasoning and deep le arning, enhancing diagnostic reliability and operational feasibility. 

6.1 Limitations and Future Work 

Although this approach achieves good performance within its defined scope, there 

are still several limitations owing to the simplifications and assumption s. Firstly, the 

method is designed for the Bayesian inversion of discrete component states. The binary 

representation is employed, and this simplification is suitable for rapid and preliminary 

safety screening and significantly enhances computational tract ability in high -31 

dimensional problems. However, it cannot precisely quantify performance loss. 

Moreover, the effectiveness of this binary classification can be challenged under 

environmental and operational variabilities, which may obscure the true structur al state; 

Secondly, the current framework presents a static model, which may suffer from the 

dynamic nature of real -world structures; Thirdly, the pairwise Markov network restricts 

dependencies to directly adjacent components. While the message -passing mec hanism 

in GNNs implicitly propagates information across the graph, this model may not fully 

capture significant long -range or global couplings present in some complex structures; 

Furthermore, while the graph property -based training approach can achieve sca lability 

to some extent, training models for exceptionally large infrastructures still demands 

substantial computational resources to ensure accuracy. These limitations restrict the 

applicability of the proposed method in certain scenarios, but they also p rovide 

directions for future improvements. 

Future research will focus on several key directions for extension of the current 

method: developing a PGM framework capable of handling multi -class state variables 

to broaden the method's applicability; extending the PGM framework to a spatio -

temporal formulation, such as coupling it with a state -space model, thereby enhancing 

its capability for problems under temporal variations; developing a hierarchical PGM 

framework that could capture long -range correlations m ore efficiently. 

7. Acknowledgment 

> The study was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China under
> Grant No. 2021YFF0501003.

8. References                                      

> [1] J. Ou, H. Li, Structural health monitoring in mainland China: review and future trends, Struct.
> Health Monit. 9 (3) (2010) 219 -231. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1475921710365269 .
> [2] V. R. Gharehbaghi, E. Noroozinejad Farsangi, M. Noori, T. Y. Yang, S. Li, A. Nguyen, S.
> Mirjalili, A critical review on structural health monitoring: Definitions, methods, and
> perspectives, Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 29 (4) (2022) 2209 -2235.
> https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831 -021 -09665 -9.
> [3] Y. J. Yan, L. Cheng, Z. Y. Wu, L. H. Yam, Development in vibration -based structural damage
> detection technique, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 21 (5) (2007) 2198 -2211.
> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2006.10.002 .
> [4] M. H. Rafiei, H. Adeli, A novel unsupervised deep learning model for global and local health
> condition assessment of structures, Eng. Struct. 156 (2018) 598 -607.
> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2017.10.070 .32

[5] G. Zhang, J. Hou, C. Wan, J. Li, L. Xie, S. Xue, Non -contact vision -based response 

reconstruction and reinforcement learning guided evolutionary algorithm for substructural 

condition assessment, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 224 (2025) 112017. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2024.112017 .

[6] E. P. Carden, P. Fanning, Vibration based condition monitoring: a review, Struct. Health Monit. 

3 (4) (2004) 355 -377.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1475921704047500 .

[7] W. Fan, P. Qiao, Vibration -based damage identification methods: a review and comparative 

study, Struct. Health Monit. 10 (1) (2011) 83 -111.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1475921710365419 .

[8] J. M. Brownjohn, P. Q. Xia, H. Hao, Y. Xia, Civil struct ure condition assessment by FE model 

updating: methodology and case studies, Finite Elem. Anal. Des. 37 (10) (2001) 761 -775. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -874X(00)00071 -8.

[9] H. Khodabandehlou, G. Pekcan, M. S. Fadali, Vibration -based structural condition assessment 

using convolution neural networks, Struct. Control Health Monit. 26 (2) (2019) e2308. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/stc.2308 .

[10] M. Azimi, A. D. Eslamlou, G. Pekcan, Data -driven structural health monitoring and damage 

detection through deep learning: State -of -the -art review, Sensors (Basel Switzerland) 20 (10) 

(2020) 2778.  https:// doi.org/10.3390/s20102778 .

[11] Y. Huang, C. Shao, B. Wu, J.L. Beck, H. Li, State -of -the -art review on Bayesian inference in 

structural system identification and damage assessment, Adv. Struct. Eng. 22 (6) (2019) 1329 -

1351.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1369433218811540 .

[12] J. Mo, W. J. Yan, Explainable Neural -Networked Variational Inference: A New and Fast 

Paradigm with Automatic Differentiation for High -Dimensional Bayesian Inverse Problems, 

Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. (2025) 111337.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2025.111337 .

[13] Y. Huang, J. L. Beck, H. Li, Bayesian system identification based on hierarchical sparse 

Bayesian learning and Gibbs sampling with a pplication to structural damage assessment, 

Comput. methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 318 (2017) 382 -411. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2017.01.030 .

[14] Y. Huang, J.L. Beck, Hierarchical sparse Bayesian learning for structural health monitoring 

with incomplete modal data, Int. J. Uncertain. Quant. 5 (2) (2015) 139 –169. 

https://doi.org/10.1615/Int.J.UncertaintyQuantification.2015011808 .

[15] C. M. Bishop, N. M. Nasrabadi, Pattern recognition and machine learning, New York: springer, 

2006. 

[16] X. Meng, J. L. Beck, Y. Huang, H. Li, Adaptive meta -learning stochastic gradient Hamiltonian 

Monte Carlo simulation for Bayesian updating of structural dynamic models , Comput. methods 

Appl. Mech. Eng. 437 (2025) 117753.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2025.117753 .

[17] S. Jia, M. Akiyama, B. Han, D. M. Frangopol, Probabilistic structural identification an d

condition assessment of prestressed concrete bridges based on Bayesian inference using 

deflection measurements, Struct. Infrastruct. Eng. 20 (1) (2024) 131 -147. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2 023.2192508 .

[18] Y. Q. Ni, Y. W. Wang, C. Zhang, A Bayesian approach for condition assessment and damage 

alarm of bridge expansion joints using long -term structural health monitoring data, Eng. Struct. 

212 (2020) 110520.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2020.110520 .

[19] J. Wang, X. Z. Liu, Y. Q. Ni, A Bayesian probabilistic approach for acoustic emission ‐based 

rail condition assessment, Comput. -Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 33 (1) (2018) 21 -34. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.12316 .33 

[20] S.K. Au, F.L. Zhang, Fundamental two -stage formulation for Bayesian system identification, 

Part I: General theory, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 66 –67 (2016) 31 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.04.025 .

[21] D. Koller, N. Friedman, Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques, MIT press, 

2009. 

[22] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, The elements of st atistical learning, 2009. 

[23] M. I. Jordan, An introduction to probabilistic graphical models, 2003. 

[24] A. J. Hughes, R. J. Barthorpe, N. Dervilis, C. R. Farrar, K. Worden, A probabilistic risk -based 

decision framework for structural health monitoring, Mech. Syst . Signal Process. 150 (2021) 

107339.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107339 .

[25] R. Fuentes, On Bayesian networks for structural health and condition monitoring, University 

of Sheffield, 2017. 

[26] R. M. Ghazi, J.G. Chen, O. Buyukozturk, Pairwise graphical models for structural health 

monitoring with dense sensor arrays, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 93 (2017) 578 -592. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymss p.2017.02.026 .

[27] J.S. Yedidia, W.T. Freeman, Y. Weiss, Understanding belief propagation and its generalizations, 

Explor. Artif. Intel. New Millenn. 8 .236 -239 (2003) 0018 -9448 

[28] N. Heess, D. Tarlow, J. Winn, Learning to pass expectation propagation messages, in: C.J. 

Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, K.Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Adv. Neural Inf. 

Process. Syst. 26, 2013. 

[29] G. Lin, C. Shen, I. Reid, A. van den Hengel, Deeply learning the messages in message passing 

inference. in: C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, R. Garnett (Eds.), Adv. Neural 

Inf. Process. Syst. 28, 2015. 

[30] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A.C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, G. Monfardini, The graph neural network 

model, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 20 (2008) 61 -80. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605 .

[31] K. Yoon, R. Liao, Y. Xiong, L. Zhang, E. Fetaya, R. Urtasun, X. Pitkow, Inference in 

probabilistic graphical models by graph neural networks, 53rd Asilomar Conf. Signal Syst. 

Comput. IEEE (2019 ) 868 -875.  https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEECONF44664.2019.9048920 .

[32] C.K. Joshi, Q. Cappart, L. M. Rousseau, T. Laurent, Learning the travelling salesperson 

problem requires rethinking generalization, Constraints 27 (2022) 70 -98. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601 -022 -0932 7-y.

[33]  V. Garg, S. Jegelka, T. Jaakkola, Generalization and representational limits of graph neural 

networks, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2020) 3419 -3430. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2002.06157 .

[34] F. Scarselli, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, The vapnik –chervonenkis dimension of graph and 

recursive neural networks, Neural Netw. 108 (2018) 248 -259. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2018.08.010 .

[35] H. Ye, C. Xie, T. Cai, R. Li, Z. Li, L. Wang, Towards a theoretical framework of out -of -

distribution generalization, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34 (2021) 23519 -23531. 

https://doi.org/10.48550 /arXiv.2106.04496 .

[36] H. Li, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, W. Zhu, Out -of -distribution generalization on graphs: A survey, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07987 2022.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.07987 .

[37] H. Park, K Yoon, Degree Matters: Assessing the Generalization of Graph Neural Network, 7th 34 

IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Intell. Digit. Content IEEE (2021) 71 -75.  https://doi.org/10.1109/IC -

NIDC54101.2 021.9660574 .

[38] G. Yehudai, E. Fetaya, E. Meirom, G. Chechik, H. Maron, From local structures to size 

generalization in graph neural networks, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2021) 11975 -11986. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2010.08853 .

[39] B.A. Cipra, An introduction to the Ising model, Am.  Math. Mon. 94  (10) 937 -959. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00029890.1987.12000742 .

[40] A. A. Neath, J. E. Cavanaugh, The Bayesian information criterion: background, derivation, and 

applications, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Stat. 4 (2) (2012), 199 -203. 

[41] T. K. Moon, The expectation -maximization algorithm, IEEE SP magazine 13 (6) (1996) 47 -60. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/79.543975 .

[42] E.T. Jaynes, Probability Theory: The Logic of Science, Cambridge University Press, 2003. 

[43] R. Mohammadi Ghazi, O. Büyüköztürk,. Damage detection with small data set using en ergy ‐

based nonlinear features, Struct. Control Health Monit. 23 (2) (2016) 333 -348. 

[44] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, R. Zemel, Gated graph sequence neural networks, arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1511.05493 2015.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1511.05493 .

[45] A. Vasileiou, S. Jegelka, R. Levie, C. Morris, Survey on generalization theory for graph neural 

networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15650, 2025.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.15650 .

[46] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1412.6980 2014.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980 .

[47] E.A. Johnson, H.F. Lam, L.S. Katafygiotis, J.L. Beck, Phase I IASC -ASCE structural health 

monitoring benchmark problem using simulated data, J. Eng. Mech. 130 (2004) 3 -15. 

https://doi.org/10.106 1/(ASCE)0733 -9399(2004)130:1(3) .

[48] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, A. S. Willsky, Tree -reweighted belief propagation algorithms 

and approximate ML estimation by pseudo -moment matching, In International Workshop on 

Artificial Intelligence and Statistics PMLR (2003) 308 -315. 

Appendix A. A simple proof for the equivalence of Bayesian inference and PGM 

inference 

Theorem 1. Let 𝑝 𝑀 𝐵 be the posterior distribution derived from a Bayesian inference 

model 𝑀 𝐵 , and 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 be the posterior distribution inferred by a Markov network model 

𝑀 𝑀 . Then 𝑝 𝑀 𝐵 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) = 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) for all 𝑫 such that 𝑝 (𝑫 ) > 0 if and only if the 

unnormalized product of potential functions defined over clique 𝐶 is proportional to 

the product of prior dis tribution and likelihood function, i.e. ∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )𝑐 ∈𝐶 ∝

𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )

Proof .

“⇒.” Assume that ∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )𝑐 ∈𝐶 = 𝑘 ∙ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ), then: 35 

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = 𝑘 

𝑍 ∙ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) (A-1)

and 

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 ) = 𝑘 

𝑍 ∙ ∑ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )

> 𝜽

= 𝑘 

𝑍 (A-2)

So the posterior of the Markov network model is: 

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) = 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 ) =

𝑘 

𝑍 ∙ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )

𝑘 

𝑍 ∙ 𝑝 (𝑫 )

= 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )

𝑝 (𝑫 ) = 𝑝 𝑀 𝐵 (A-3)

“⇐.” Assume that 𝑝 𝑀 𝐵 (𝜽 |𝑫 ) = 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 |𝑫 )

This implies: 

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 ) = 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 )

𝑝 (𝑫 ) (A-4)

thus, 

𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 )

𝑝 (𝑫 ) 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) (A-5)

Since 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 ) and 𝑝 (𝑫 ) are both functions that only depend on 𝑫 , let 𝑘 (𝑫 ) = 

> 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑫 )
> 𝑝 (𝑫 )

. Because 𝑝 𝑀 𝑀 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) = 1 

> 𝑍

∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )𝑐 ∈𝐶 , we have: 

∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )

> 𝑐 ∈𝐶

= 𝑍 ∙ 𝑘 (𝑫 ) ∙ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) (A-6)

If 𝑘 (𝑫 ) is not a constant (i.e. varies with 𝑫 ), an additional scaling factor that depends 

only on 𝑫 is introduced on the right side. In order for the equation to hold for all 𝜽 

and 𝑫 , the function forms on the left and right must match exactly. This requires that 

𝑘 (𝑫 ) must be a constant. Therefore, ∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝜽 , 𝑫 )𝑐 ∈𝐶 ∝ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ). According to the 

analysis i n Section  2.2 , the conditions of  Theorem 1  can be easily satisfied, i.e., 

∏ 𝜓 𝑖𝑗 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑗 ) ∏ 𝜙 𝑖 (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 )

> 𝑖 ∈𝝂 (𝑖 ,𝑗 )∈𝜺

= 𝑍 ∙ 𝑝 (𝜽 , 𝑫 ) ∝ 𝑝 (𝜽 )𝑝 (𝑫 |𝜽 ) (A-7)

Appendix B. General algorithms for PGMs inference 

Appendix B. 1. Variable elimination 

Variable elimination is a fundamental exact inference algorithm for computing 

marginal probabilities in probabilistic graphical models. By systematically eliminating 

variables through a sequence of sum -product operations, VE efficiently reduces the 36 

computa tional complexity in high -dimensional probability distributions. The algorithm 

operates as follows: For a given target query P(𝑋 |𝐸 = 𝑒 ), where 𝑋 denotes query 

variables and 𝐸 represents observed evidence, VE first identifies an elimination order 

𝒵 for non -query, non -evidence variables. For each variable 𝒵 𝑖 in this order, following 

steps are implemented: 

(1) multiplies all factors involving 𝒵 𝑖 ;

(2) marginalizes 𝒵 𝑖 by summing over its possible states; 

(3) replaces these factors with the resulting factor. 

This process continues until only the query variables remain, at which point the 

desired marginal probabilities are obtained. The entire process is given in  Algorithm 1 .

Algorithm 1 

Probabilistic graphical model inference through variable elimination 

Input: Set of factors ℱ (conditional probability distributions or potentials), Target 

query variables 𝑋 , Observed evidence variables 𝐸 = 𝑒 .

𝒵 = {𝒵 1, 𝒵 2, … , 𝒵 𝑛 } (Non -query, non -evidence variables) 

𝜋 = (𝜋 1, 𝜋 2, … , 𝜋 𝑛 ) (Elimination order over 𝒵 )

for each factor 𝜙 ∈ ℱ

if 𝜙 contains evidence variables 𝐸 

reduce 𝜙 by fixing 𝐸 = 𝑒 

remove 𝐸 from the scope of 𝜙 

end if 

remove all empty factors from ℱ

end for 

for  𝑖  = 1 ∙∙∙ 𝑛  do 

𝒵  = 𝜋 1 (Select the variable to be eliminated) 

ℱ𝑧 ← {𝜙 ∈ ℱ|𝒵 ∈ Scope (𝜙 )} (Collect all factors related to current 𝒵 )

𝜓 ← ∏ 𝜙 𝜙 ∈ℱ𝑧 (Factor product) 

𝜏 ← ∑ 𝜓 𝒵 (Marginalization) 

ℱ ← (ℱ\ℱ𝒵 ) ∪ {𝜏 }

end for 

𝛽 ← ∏ 𝜙 𝜙 ∈ℱ𝒵 (Product all factors involving the evidence) 

𝛽 ∗ ← 𝛽  

> ∑𝛽 𝑋

(normalization) 37 

Return 𝛽 ∗ (marginal probabilities given the evidence P(𝑋 |𝐸 = 𝑒 ))

Appendix B. 2. Belief propagation algorithm 

Belief propagation (BP), also known as sum -product algorithm, provides an 

efficient framework for marginal probability computation in probabilistic graphical 

models. This algorithm calculates the messages transmitted between all adjacent nodes, 

which is expressed as: 

𝓂 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑡

(𝑥 𝑗 ) = 𝛼 ∑ 𝑒 −𝑏 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 −𝜔 𝑖𝑗 (𝑥 𝑖 𝑥 𝑗 −1)

> 𝑥 𝑖

∏ 𝓂 𝑘𝑖 

> 𝑡 −1

(𝑥 𝑖 )

> 𝑘 ∈𝑁 (𝑖 )/𝑗

(B-1)

Where 𝓂 𝑖𝑗 (𝑥 𝑗 ) denotes the messages from node 𝑖 to node 𝑗 ; 𝛼 is a normalization 

constant ensuring ∑ 𝓂 𝑖𝑗 (𝑥 𝑗 )𝑥 𝑖 = 1; and 𝑁 (𝑖 ) denotes all the neighboring nodes of 

node 𝑖 ; 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 and 𝑏 𝑖 represents edge potential and node potential, respectively. After 

message iterates to step 𝑇 , node beliefs are computed as: 

ℬ𝑖 (𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝛾 𝑒 −𝑏 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 ∏ 𝓂 𝑗𝑖  

> 𝑇

(𝑥 𝑖 )

> 𝑗 ∈𝑁 (𝑖 )

(B-2)

The specific process is shown in  Algorithm 2 .

Algorithm 2 

Probabilistic graphical model inference through belief propagation 

Input: Graph 𝒢 (𝜈 , 𝜀 ), edge potential 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 , node potential 𝑏 𝑖 , tolerance ϵ

𝓂 𝑖𝑗  

> 0

(𝑥 𝑗 ) ← 1 

> |𝒳 |

(Initialize messages with uniform distribution) 

𝓂 𝑗𝑖  

> 0

(𝑥 𝑖 ) ← 1

> |𝒳 |

while max |𝑚 𝑡 +1 − 𝑚 𝑡 | > ϵ do 

for each variable 𝑖 ∈ 𝜈 do 

update 𝓂 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑡

(𝑥 𝑗 ) by Eq. ( B-1)

end for 

end while 

Compute marginal distributions ℬ𝑖 (𝑥 𝑖 ) by Eq. ( B-2)

Return {ℬ𝑖 (𝑥 𝑖 )}

Appendix B. 3. Monte Carlo methods 

Monte Carlo methods provide a computationally feasible framework for 38 

approximate inference in probabilistic graphical models where exact computation of 

marginal probabilities becomes intractable. This kind of method samples from a 

closely -related distribution and estimates the marginal probabilities by sample -based 

averages. Here we give a brief introduction of the Gibbs sampling. 

The Gibbs sampling approach belongs to the class of Markov Chain Monte Carlo 

(MCMC) methods. This algorithm iteratively constructs a Markov chain that converges 

to the target stationary distribution 𝑝 (𝑥 ), thereby enabling effective sample generation 

through chain transitions. Specifically, the Gibbs sampler samples each variable 

conditioned on its Markov blanket. For a variable 𝑥 𝑖 , let Mb(𝑥 𝑖 )𝑡 −1 denote its 

Markov blanket (neighbors of node 𝑖 in the gr aph). The conditional distribution 

satisfies: 

𝑝 (𝑥 𝑖 

> ′

|𝑥 −𝑖 ) ∝ ∏ 𝜓 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑐 )

> 𝑐 :𝑥 𝑖 ∈𝑐

(B-3)

Let 𝑥 (𝑡 ) denote the state at iteration 𝑡 . The transition kernel for updating is: 

𝑇 (𝑥 (𝑡 +1)|𝑥 (𝑡 )) = ∏ 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑖 

> (𝑡 +1)

|Mb(𝑥 𝑖 )𝑡 )

> 𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

(B-4)

The balance condition 𝜋 (𝑥 )𝑇 (𝑥 ′|𝑥 ) = 𝜋 (𝑥 ′)𝑇 (𝑥 |𝑥 ′) ensures convergence to the 

stationary distribution. Afterwards, a new value is sampled from this updated 

distribution and it will replace the previous value. Specific process of Gibbs sampling 

is shown in  Algorithm 3 .

Algorithm 3 

Probabilistic graphical model inference through MCMC (Gibbs sampling) 

Input: Graph 𝒢 (𝜈 , 𝜀 ), clique potentials 𝜓 𝑗 (𝑥 𝑗 ) (defined in section 2.1), number of 

iterations T 

𝑥 𝑖  

> (0)

← 0 (Initialize the samples arbitrarily) 

for 𝑡 = 1 ∙∙∙ 𝑇 do 

for each variable 𝑥 𝑖 do 

compute conditional distribution by Eq. ( B-4)

sample 𝑥 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )

~𝑃 (𝑥 𝑖 |Mb(𝑥 𝑖 )𝑡 −1)

end for 

end for 

Return 𝑥 𝑖 

> (𝑡 0)

, … , 𝑥 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )39

Appendix C. Extended experiments 

This part presents extended experiments to evaluate the robustness of the proposed 

Bayesian inversion framework under two conditions. The first is that the physical 

structure and the adopted graphical model are not matched, and the second is that the 

depen dencies between components are not considered. 

Appendix C.1. Robustness Tests for Model Mismatch 

This experiment tests the method's sensitivity when damage occurs in structural 

components that are not directly represented by the edges or nodes of the learned 

probabilistic graphical model. This simulates practical scenarios where the model 

simplificati on may not capture all potential damage locations. Two simulation cases are 

considered, and the corresponding graphical models as well as the inference results are 

shown in  Figure 15 . The GNNs used to make inference are trained on graphs which 

have similar properties with the established graphical model. Three quantitative metrics 

are also computed in  Table 3.

> (a) 40

(b) 

Figure 15 . The inference results of two experiments where damage occurs in structural components that 

are not represented in the graphical model.                                            

> Figure 15(a) Figure 15(b)
> FPR F1 score accuracy FPR F1 score accuracy
> VE0.1429 0.6667 0.875 0.0714 0.8 0.9375
> BP0.3571 0.4444 0.6875 0.4286 0.4 0.625
> TRBP 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.3571 0.4444 0.6875
> MCMC 0.3571 0.4444 0.6875 0.2857 0.5 0.75
> VI 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.1429 0.6667 0.875
> GNN 0.2857 0.5 0.75 0.1429 0.6667 0.875

Table 3. The quantitative metrics of the results in  Figure 15 .

The results in  Figure 15  and  Table 3 show that when damage occurs in structural 

components that are not represented in the graphical model, there would be more false 

positives, which means that the proposed method is somewhat sensitiv e to such 

scenarios. Consequently, the complete structure should be modeled as much as possible 

when establishing the probabilistic graphical model. 

Appendix C.2. Dependency Analysis 

The second experiment is to examine the contribution of modeling spatial 41 

dependencies between component states to the overall inference accuracy. This is 

achieved by setting all edge potential parameters to zero, which removes the terms that 

couple the stat es of adjacent components. The inference results under the same four 

damage cases as in Section 5 are shown in  Figure 16 , and the quantitative metrics are 

computed in  Table 4.

The results show that in Case 2 and 3, the actual damages are not correctly detected 

(false negatives) when data dependencie s are ignored. This might indicate that ignoring 

dependencies leads to detection failures. In addition, compared with the results in 

Figure 14 , there are more false positives when the dependencies are not take into 

account. Therefore, the explicit modeling of spatial dependencies is shown to be a key 

factor improving overall inference accuracy. 

> (a) 42

(b) 

(c) 43 

(d) 

Figure 16 . The inference results of four damage cases. The dependencies between component states are 

not considered. It can be found that there are false negatives in Case 2 and 3, this might indicate that 

ignoring dependencies leads to detection failures. 

Case 1 Case 2 (false negative) 

FPR  F1 score  accuracy  FPR  F1 score  accuracy 

VE 0.1429  0.6667  0.875  0 0.6667  0.9375 

BP 0.5  0.3636  0.5625  0 0 0.875 

TRBP  0.2857  0.5  0.75  0 0.6667  0.9375 

MCMC  0.2857  0.5  0.75  0.0714  0.5  0.875 

VI  0.2857  0.5  0.75  0 0.6667  0.9375 

GNN  0.3571  0.4444  0.6875  0 0 0.875 

Case 3 (false negative)  Case 4 

FPR  F1 score  accuracy  FPR  F1 score  accuracy 

VE 0.1429  0.4  0.8125  0.1429  0.6667  0.875 

BP 0.1429  0.4  0.8125  0.5714  0.3333  0.5 

TRBP  0.2143  0.4  0.8125  0.3571  0.4444  0.6875 

MCMC  0.1429  0.3333  0.75  0.5  0.3636  0.5625 

VI  0.1429  0.5  0.875  0.2857  0.5  0.75 

GNN  0.1429  0.4  0.8125  0.3571  0.4444  0.6875 

Table 4. The quantitative metrics of the results in  Figure 16 .